Who, short of Solomon, would choose to be in Harvey R. Sorkow's shoes these days? He is the New Jersey judge who must decide the legality of the contract by which Mary Beth Whitehead agreed to bear a child for William and Elizabeth Stern. Then Judge Sorkow must determine with whom the fruit of that contract, a little girl, should live - the biological mother and her husband, or the biological father (by artificial insemination) and his wife. And to help him make these difficult decisions, Judge Sorkow has about as much case law to call upon as Solomon did when he heard his famous custody suit. None. Elizabeth Stern, a 41-year-old pediatrician, is not, strictly speaking, infertile. Fearing, however, that pregnancy might aggravate her multiple sclerosis, she and her husband leased Mrs. Whitehead's reproductive potential for $10,000. Already the mother of two children by her husband, Mrs. Whitehead was, Mr. Stern said, ''too good to be true.''
She was indeed. When Mrs. Whitehead saw her baby, whom she named Sara, she was ''overpowered'' by her emotions. She turned Sara over to the Sterns but didn't accept the money. A few days later she asked if she could keep the child, whom they'd named Melissa, for a week. The Sterns agreed: ''We thought she was suicidal. She said she couldn't live without the baby.'' When Sara/Melissa wasn't returned, six policemen arrived at the Whiteheads' front door. Mrs. Whitehead handed the child out a back window to her husband and they fled to Florida. After authorities tracked them down, a New Jersey court awarded the Sterns temporary custody.
Sara/Melissa, or Baby M as she is called in court papers, is not unique. More than 500 such children have been contracted for in the last few years. And the surrogate mother business appears to have a bright future, given the marked increase in infertility among the young and the marked drop in the number of adoptions.
The public obligation is obvious. States need to evaluate the very idea of surrogate parenthood, decide whether it is a tolerable practice in the first place and, if so, establish guidelines just as they do for adoption and other analogous practices. Should surrogate parenthood be tolerated? Is bearing a child for someone unable to do so ''a gift of love'' as its enthusiasts suggest? Or is it simply baby-selling?
If it is tolerable should society provide, as many states do in adoption cases, a period in which mothers can change their minds? In any case the business is probably here to stay, which is reason enough for regulations predicated on the child's best interests.
Legislation relating to surrogate child-bearing has been introduced in 25 states but nowhere are the contracts yet legal and enforceable. They will be in New York if new recommendations of the State Senate's Judiciary Committee are adopted. Meanwhile, in New Jersey, Judge Sorkow will have to decide on his own. May Baby M be the real winner of this terrible contest.
Children have an unerring instinct for nutritional food and reject it with contumely. So why do writers of medical texts insist that children will instinctively choose the right foods?
The learned authors may pay too much heed to laboratory rats. These prudent rodents eat sensibly and don't become overweight even when deluged with rat chow. Another reason, researchers from the University of Minnesota suggest in the New England Journal of Medicine, is the common misunderstanding of a noted 1930's experiment in which orphans were found to thrive on a diet they chose themselves. Less noted is that the orphans could choose only from foods that were uniformly wholesome. The real question, unanswered, is whether they would have thrived if offered puff pastry and sugared cereals along with the spinach.
The researchers suspect not. If you serve laboratory rats unlimited cookies, marshmallows, chocolate, salami and bananas, they will gorge themselves into three times normal weight. A child, the researchers say, is likely to do the same. They counsel parents to ''limit the diet of young children to a variety of fresh or frozen vegetables or legumes; dairy products; fresh and unsweetened fruits and fruit juices; breads, pastas, rice, cereals and other grain products; and lean meats.''
Fine advice, as far as it goes. But when the researchers can spare time from the laboratory, they might try sitting a child in front of fresh or frozen legumes. Yuppies may smack their lips over modish arugula. To children, spinach is still spinach.
A man with AIDS and his wife who want to resanctify their marriage in St. Patrick's Cathedral may now do so because of the humanity and good sense of John Cardinal O'Connor. By reversing the rector's decision that would have barred them, the Cardinal has sent an important message with medical as well as moral implications.
David and Maria Hefner were married three years ago in City Hall. Recently, after learning of his illness, they decided to renew their vows in a church ceremony. But St. Patrick's, Mrs. Hefner's ''dream church,'' was denied them. They were told to find another church because AIDS was ''transmittable.''
Later, Msgr. James Rigney, the rector who made the decision, said people in life-threatening situations would receive better pre-marriage counseling in their local parishes. That inadequate explanation let stand the implication that someone with AIDS would place others in the cathedral at risk of contagion - a misinformed notion unsupported by any medical evidence.
After the decision to exclude the Hefners was made, a spokesman said the church had not yet devised guidelines to handle such requests. For Cardinal O'Connor, the only guideline needed was decency.
Do as I say, not as I do. That would seem to be President Reagan's maxim on Medicare for the elderly.
Mr. Reagan's policy toward Medicare has emphasized cost containment above all else. His latest budget proposal would cut nearly $5 billion from the Medicare program. The measures taken under that policy have all aimed at cutting hospital costs and drastically limit senior citizens' choices of physicians.
The latter aim has been served by a policy of urging Medicare beneficiaries to enroll in so-called Health Maintenance Organizations, which restrict patient choice to a very limited number of doctors. The Reagan Administration has also pushed senior citizens to use so-called participating physicians who accept lower fees for their work.
Even before President Reagan's recent colonoscopy and prostate operation, a McGraw-Hill survey had revealed that no one in Congress or in the executive branch who advocated H.M.O.'s for others belonged to one themselves. When it comes to their own treatment, they, like the President, all prefer fee-for-service medicine, in which they can freely choose the physician.
What the difference means in practice has now been vividly illustrated by President Reagan's choice of physicians to provide his recent medical care. Rather than pick from among the abundant number of excellent Government or private doctors in the District of Columbia, Mr. Reagan and his family chose to bring in seven physicians from the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota - surgeons, anesthesiologists and a pathologist.
Of course, the President wants to have doctors in whom he can have full confidence and trust, and the Mayo Clinic physicians were picked by an old family friend. The procedures performed on the President were done properly and he emerged in good health and good humor.
What is jarring, though, is that in planning his latest medical care, Mr. Reagan explicitly declined to use Medicare or to live within its limitations. Instead, he chose to be covered by an old Blue Cross-Blue Shield policy he has had from his days as Governor of California.
It may be argued that he is 75 years old and that he and his family were naturally concerned about the possible impact of surgery on him. But the family of every other 75-year-old citizen about to undergo surgery feels equally concerned. Why should those other senior citizens be forced to accept an extremely limited choice?
The reason, of course, is that Congress and the Administration want Medicare costs to be restrained as much as possible. And the greater the limitation of choice, the more the cost savings - a maxim the leading H.M.O.'s understood years ago.
The harsh truth is that any Medicare patient who asked for the kind of luxury care that has been arranged for the President would be regarded by hospital officials as mad. It would be explained to this hypothetical patient that Medicare now pays only for the most minimal care, short of a level that might draw a possible suit for malpractice. And certainly Medicare does not pay for bringing in special doctors from some place a thousand miles away. At the very least, Mr. Reagan and his family are displaying an extreme insensitivity to the concerns of other people of his generation. If economies must be sought at the expense of the health care of senior citizens, then the President who has done so much to impose these economies should be seen as willing to accept similar sacrifices for himself. Mr. Reagan could have gotten equally superb care from physicians in his own community -doctors that Medicare patients use.
In planning for his surgery, Mr. Reagan demonstrated that he prefers top quality, that no expense should be spared on his own medical care. But why has he so energetically pushed for lesser quality care for other senior citizens? In a democracy, the policy of do as I say, not as I do can only stimulate cynicism, resentment, anger and determination to express those sentiments at the polling place at the next possible opportunity.
If Mr. Reagan really believes it is important for the nation to practice economy in medical care, he should have set an example. He injured his credibility by failing to do so.
A little boy's truck is a toy, not a harbinger of a career in the trucking industry. A little girl's doll is not simply a doll but a symbol of the baby she's expected to have some day. Small wonder, therefore, that women are so often devastated when they find themselves infertile. Men may wish just as fervently to be fathers but women have been programmed for parenthood, socially as well as physiologically, almost since birth.
More and more American women are knowing that pain. In 1976 only 10 percent of American couples failed to conceive after a year of trying. By 1983 the percentage was between 12 and 15 percent, and may be even higher since the estimate includes only those who sought medical help. Part of the increase is attributable to postponed childbearing. A greater part relates to the damage done by pelvic inflammatory disease, often a concomitant to intrauterine devices and changing sexual practices.
Given the small number of adoptable babies, surrogate mothers were perhaps inevitable once the medical technology became available. And while some Americans may welcome the willingness of women to lease their wombs, many find the business morally repugnant. Few, however, doubt it's here to stay.
No state gives legal recognition to surrogate mother contracts, but 25 states are considering regulatory legislation. The various proposals fall into three categories: Regulating surrogate childbearing. Several states would do this in a manner that closely parallels adoption laws. After the birth, the surrogate would be given time - 30 days if the adoption model is adhered to - to change her mind about giving up the baby. Legalizing the contracts and guaranteeing adoption by the biological father and his wife. That's the theory of the Baby M case now being tried in New Jersey. Mandating informed consent. This proposal is exemplified by the bill about to be introduced in the New York State Legislature by Senators John Dunne and Mary Goodhue. Similar to legislation pending in California and Michigan, this approach is stringent and should be since it is predicated on the best interests of the child.
Under the bill, all parties would apply in advance to the the courts for approval of a surrogate child contract. The court would investigate the health, finances and stability of the intended parents and receive certification of the wife's infertility. The potential surrogate would be examined both by a physician to advise her of the physical risks of pregnancy and a mental health professional to determine if she and her husband, if any, are capable of giving up a child, and to counsel them.
The court would also insure independent legal counsel for all parties and approve all fees. This would presumably minimize the potential for exploiting a surrogate mother financially. The surrogate mother would make all the decisions relating to her pregnancy. But once the court approved the contract, she would lose parental rights irrevocably at the child's birth.
Children, as most parents know, are fond of stating an unassailable truth: that they didn't ask to be born. It seems only fair to give as much protection as possible to children who not only didn't ask but who enter the world by such an odd and tortuous route. Even those New Yorkers who would like to see that route declared illegal will agree that by focusing on the child, the Dunne-Goodhue bill focuses on the right person.
Webster's dictionary defines ''athlete'' as ''a person trained in exercises, games or contests requiring physical strength, skill, stamina, or speed.'' As both an athlete and a surgeon, I have long felt that surgeons, at least the great ones, possess all of the attributes of athletes.
A good surgeon must have enormous strength and staying power. Spending 8, 10 or 12 hours a day in the operating room is no light task. You need the heart of a marathon runner to hang in. Along with the qualities of coordination, agility, delicacy and grace, one needs lateral vision, a trait also considered essential to quarterbacks.
Not least among the athlete's essential tools is ambidexterity - the ability to use both hands equally well. This is also a skill required in other professions. How about an orchestra conductor, or a magician, or a great cook who has to work right-handed and left-handed while watching 14 pots and pans cooking to the second? That's some kind of athlete! When I asked my secretary about two-handed secretaries, she responded, ''you mean six-handed secretaries.'' And can you imagine a piano player or pizza-flinger who can't skilfully use both hands?
It is with no small sense of dismay, therefore, that I have discovered over the years that amidexterity has eluded my profession: most of my fellow surgeons are one-handed. They never learned to use their opposite hand, instead depending on their assistants when a difficulty arose and they needed a second hand.
For example, a surgeon controls a hemorrhage using his right hand to compress the bleeding area. Now he wants to place some ligatures to close the hole in the bleeding artery. If he lets go, the hemorrhage will recur, so he either has to switch hands to free up his sewing hand, or place himself at the mercy of his assistant, thereby losing control of the procedure -which is his responsibility. But if he could sew with both hands - easy!
Imagine a great professional basketball player not being able to use his left hand, thus having to stop and shift the ball from his left hand to his right in order to shoot a layup. Are you kidding? By that time, his opponent would have captured the ball. Those underprivileged kids you see playing on the cement courts of our inner cities are two-handed from an early age. One reason is that there's virtually no room for one-handed players in college and professional ball, to which these kids aspire.
What, then, explains surgeons? Why have they remained one-handed athletes? I have tried for 25 years to teach my one-handed residents to learn to use both hands but have been successful in only two instances. Both involved highly motivated young surgeons from India who were fiercely determined to be the best.
The reason an inner-city basketball player learns to use his left hand and a young surgeon refuses is quite clear to me. First of all, the young surgeon is in a fortunate situation. His high income is guaranteed; no matter that he can use only one hand. There is another reason. Whenever you have to learn a new sport, a new technique or a new skill, you must face a period of awkwardness. You have to look clumsy for a period of time before you master dexterity and a sense of coordination in the opposite hand. That, it seems to me, has been a major obstacle to young surgeons' mastering the use of both hands: too much ego and too little incentive.
The fact is that every sport requires the acquisition of skills that do not at first glance appear natural. The flutter kick in swimming, so difficult to teach youngsters, comes to mind, as does proper breathing technique. And think of the agony that golfers go through to keep their heads down. All of these skills require motivation and discipline, which suggests a final reason why surgeons have been slow to acquire use of both hands: they don't play before a big audience. If surgeons operated in an arena before upwards of 100,000 spectators or before millions on television, you can bet they'd be embarrassed into becoming ambidextrous.
Chappie Blackburn, the trainer for Joe Louis, taught Joe to develop a devastating left punch by literally tying his right hand behind his back. Gil Clancy did the same thing with the great Emil Griffith. I have been tempted over the years to do this with my surgical residents. The premise that the two-handed athlete is far superior to the one-handed athlete has by now been established beyond all question. I believe there will come a time in surgery when surgeons will be forced to learn to use both hands. A one-handed surgeon is a disadvantaged expert. I challenge my friends in the surgical world to think of themselves as skilled athletes, to master the use of both hands.
Renewed attention is being focused on questions about AIDS testing. Who should be tested? Should it be voluntary or mandatory? Should test results be kept confidential or made public?
Although the test for the virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome has been licensed for nearly two years, we don't yet know its scientific value, and its usefulness is still being debated. Nevertheless, some politicians have proposed making the tests mandatory - for example, for prostitutes, prisoners, hospital patients, marriage license applicants, pregnant women and job applicants.
But neither voluntary nor mandatory testing policies can succeed unless they guarantee that test results will be confidential and that there will not be discrimination against those who test positive. We cannot expect people to respond to medical advice if, in doing so, they risk losing their jobs, housing, insurance, children and privacy.
Moreover, misuse of testing and test results could damage the nation's ability to study and understand the AIDS epidemic. What we know about the disease we know because homosexual men and AIDS patients have volunteered to cooperate with research efforts. If misguided testing drives these people away, it could only prolong the epidemic.
We know for certain several facts about the AIDS virus test: It does not indicate who is sick or even who will become sick. The test identifies most, but not all, of those who have been exposed to the disease and who are probably infectious.
Since the disease can be transmitted only through sex or an exchange of blood, other than for blood banks the test results are useful only to the individual and to his or her sexual partners. The social utility of widespread testing is to protect those sexual partners who are not protecting themselves. Proposals to find previous sexual partners are dependent not just on the memory of the individual but also on his or her willingness to name names.
A confusing array of testing policies has already been proposed. The Public Health Service encourages anyone who thinks they have been exposed to the AIDS virus to be tested. The agency has also supported confidentiality of test results and has issued statements opposing discrimination against people who test positive as well as people with AIDS. The Justice Department has determined, however, that if the test is positive, any subsequent discrimination is legal and is not the Government's concern.
The certain result of this mixed Federal policy is that all voluntary testing programs will fail. The only volunteers for a test, which might cost an individual everything, would be those who have no reason to fear the outcome and those who are already sick and may need the test results to qualify for the little health care that is now available.
Those whom public health officials most want to test - those who might have been exposed and those who might be infectious - will stay away.
Without confidentiality and anti-discrimination protections, the mandatory testing programs are also sure to fail. Black market blood tests, forged identification cards, bribery, safe houses and fugitives - all could result from such tyrannical tactics that are in effect a house-to-house search.
In practical terms, the cost of a vast mandatory testing program would be prohibitive. Furthermore, a de facto quarantine of those who tested positive and subsequently lost their jobs, insurance or housing would produce a permanent class of people who could not provide for themselves.
If policies of confidentiality and nondiscrimination were in place, there would be reason to be more optimistic. If Americans believed they would be treated as citizens with rights, they would respond as citizens with responsibilities. If test results were treated as health information and not licenses for jobs and housing, those in danger might volunteer.
We should protect the public health by protecting confidentiality and fair treatment. If the Justice Department does not reverse its position, then Congress should pass legislation that protects against misuse and assures confidentiality of test results.
The American family has a dilemma. Our grandparents face the possibility of catastrophic illness, and we are asked to help pay for care that we cannot afford.
Otis R. Bowen, Secretary of Health and Human Services, suggested a self-funding insurance program, and the Democratic Party raised the stakes by proposing a new entitlement program for the elderly. The program is politically popular, but is it good public policy? I suggest that it is not.
We should not transfer more national assets to health care. We already spend 11 cents of every dollar of the gross national product on medical care. Our industrial plants are obsolete, our school teachers are underpaid, our bridges are falling down, yet 30 to 40 percent of the hospital beds in this country are empty.
Health care is important but it cannot be our only priority. Medicare and Medicaid costs have been rising by 19 percent a year since they were adopted. Do we really want a new expensive entitlement program?
Medical care is a fiscal black hole into which a nation can pour endless wealth. We spend more than $1 billion a day on health care, making it one of the high-cost items that increases the cost of doing business in the United States and causes American goods to be uncompetitive in the international marketplace. We should be immensely skeptical about transferring any more assets into health care. We should also redefine our priorities and increase the efficiency of the gargantuan health care programs.
Do we really want to pay more to cover medical costs of the elderly? Samuel H. Preston, a demographer, calculates that we spend 10 times more per capita of the Federal budget on the elderly than on our children. If we have idle assets, why not do something about the 37 million Americans who were refused even basic health care last year? Or about the 20 percent of our children who haven't yet been given polio shots? Or about the one-third of all pregnant women who have had no health care in their first trimester?
The Federal Government pays 50 percent of the health care costs of the elderly. This may not be enough, but it is far more than for any other demographic group, and the elderly have the highest disposal income. While the nation's borrowing costs are soaring, is it fair to put a new entitlement program for the elderly on the national credit card?
The poverty rate for children, who don't vote, is twice as high as for the elderly, who do vote. Why not spend our dollars to help our children become healthier?
Moreover, who would define ''catastrophic''? Give health providers another blank check for the elderly and we will soon be having the public paying for heart transplants for 75-year-old ex-smokers at the same time that we will be denying basic care to millions of the medically indigent.
Finally, do we really want a new entitlement program based on age? We are closing so-called well-baby clinics and shrinking the funds available for children and the poor, yet we have 265,000 millionaires on or eligible for Medicare. The Government pays huge sums to the elderly rich while ignoring the impoverished young.
I joined the Democratic Party not because it expands middle-class entitlements but because it cares for the needy. I think we should base new Federal programs on need rather than age.
This national family does not lack compassion, but it does lack prudence. It knows what it wants but not what it can afford. It knows how to appeal to voting blocs but not how to set national priorities.
Homosexual rights groups and television crews streamed into Atlanta last week to eavesdrop on a meeting convened by the Federal Centers for Disease Control. What drew the crowds were suggestions that the agency was preparing to advocate mandatory testing for the AIDS virus, which homosexual groups intensely oppose.
Public health officials have almost no weapons but the AIDS antibody test to combat the deadly disease, and the agency wanted to hear their views on how the test might best be used. Despite disruptions, the tension between the two groups gradually ebbed: the health officials made clear they want wider voluntary use of the test, but are almost unanimously opposed to mandatory testing.
From the Atlanta meeting emerged a new public health strategy against AIDS, but one that requires the Reagan Administration to reverse course and provide the necessary legal framework. Mandatory testing. With no cure or vaccine for AIDS, the only way to prevent spread of the virus is to persuade people to change behavior. The test for antibody to the AIDS virus has proved effective in screening blood donations. Why not make the test mandatory at hospitals and V.D. clinics so that carriers can be identified and encouraged not to spread it? Because mandatory testing would frighten away those who most need to be reached. Unless confidentiality and freedom from discrimination can be better assured, those who test positive have reason to fear loss of housing, jobs and health insurance. Hardly a single public health official at the conference favored mandatory testing. Voluntary testing and counseling. Almost all the authorities favor encouraging more people to take the test voluntarily, provided that it is purely an adjunct to counseling. Counseling, both before and after the test, is what seems most likely to make people avoid high-risk behaviors. That's the rationale behind New York State's large new expansion of voluntary counseling and testing. Broad-based testing. Is it worth encouraging voluntary testing for everyone? Probably not; screening the 37 million people admitted to hospitals each year would not be cost-effective. The 1.5 million Americans now estimated to carry the virus are predominantly homosexuals and intravenous drug addicts. Testing should be routinely offered, and informed consent obtained, at V.D. clinics and drug treatment centers. Many health officers now consider it worthwhile to trace and offer counseling to the sexual partners of those who test positive.
Wider counseling and testing could save many lives. But it has little chance of being fully effective without firmer assurances of confidentiality and guarantees against discrimination. State laws that provide such protections are not always enforced. Instead of setting an example, the Justice Department last June denied AIDS carriers the protection of the law shielding the handicapped from discrimination. It ruled that a Federal employer could cite fear of AIDS as a reason for dismissal. By repudiating that opinion, the Administration would help create the framework for public health officials to make most effective use of counseling and testing.
A vigorous public education program should be the second part of its strategy. Third, equally important, drug addicts seeking detoxification need to get treatment immediately and not after the wait of months, even years, they now face in New York and elsewhere. An Administration that pursued those goals could be said to be taking the AIDS epidemic seriously.
The doubters and critics still have a point. Boldly and sensibly, the Reagan Administration has endorsed a new insurance plan that would instantly deflate the fear millions have of being wiped out by catastrophic illness. But the Administration has not yet done anything to allay a fear felt by students of Medicare. They see a rapidly rising need for home care and treatment in nursing facilities and worry that Federal revenues will be wiped out.
There's no single remedy or reassurance against this kind of catastrophic expense. But there are some sensible demonstrations already under way, notably in New York, that strongly suggest ways to improve care and cut cost. They deserve support, and may well warrant eager emulaion.
$ ? * To his lasting credit, President Reagan has endorsed the Bowen plan that would expand Medicare to cover illnesses requiring long periods of hospitalization. Named for Dr. Otis Bowen, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the plan would benefit 30 million older citizens. For an additional premium of $4.92 a month, Medicare would provide an unlimited number of treatment days in a hospital and limit their costs to $2,000.
The Bowen plan is warmly welcome, but it applies mainly to the 200,000 patients a year who need long-term hospital care. It does not address health problems outside the hospital, like the need for care now met mostly in nursing homes. As it stands, the Bowen plan is self-financing. What unhinges the critics is the fear of pressure to enlarge it to cover the costs of nursing home care and care in the home, untold billions.
As the nation's population ages, the number of the very old increases disproportionately. The elderly are far and away the fastest growing segment of the population. There are now 30 million Americans aged 65 and over - 12 percent of the population. By the year 2000 there will be 35 million - 13 percent. Of those, 5 million will be 85 or older; that compares with only 3 million today.
How will the nation pay for the care they need in nursing facilities or at home? Now is the time to discover what works and what doesn't. Some imaginatively designed demonstrations requiring waivers of Medicaid and Medicare regulations already show promise. One experiment involves Health Maintenance Organizations, a system of care providing in-patient and out-patient prepaid services. Can H.M.O.'s be broadened to cover services in subscribers' homes and in nursing facilities, thus delaying or preventing hospitalizations? If so, in a time of $500-a-day hospital costs, the prospects for savings are obvious, and enormous.
Four such tests are under way in the nation, one in New York City. They are known as 'SHMO's,' Social Health Maintenance Organizations, and they are being evaluated at Brandeis University. SHMO's are geared to the very old and differ from H.M.O.'s by providing a range of chronic-care services at home or in a nursing facility. If this demonstration is expanded, it could provide stronger and more extensive data. In another experiment, New York City's Human Resources Administration is testing an emergency response system. A telecommunications device is worn around the neck and activated by pressing a button. It alerts a health care operator who can phone and dispatch an ambulance if needed. The agency believes this can safely cut Medicaid costs by reducing home care coverage, particularly at night when patients are asleep. Policy makers need to know more about the delivery of health care services from the perspective of home attendants and health care aides. Fordham, with financial support from the United Hospital Fund, has begun such a survey. It is exploring the difficulties these workers perceive in caring for the very old and the support services that workers need. Conditions vary by city and region. More such surveys are needed.
The Bowen plan would protect elderly people who require extensive hospital stays from being wiped out financially. But it is outside the confines of hospitals, at home and in nursing facilities, where catastrophic costs often await the very old and their families. Congress, which is now almost certain to enact something like the Bowen plan, bears another obligation: to add funds for research and demonstration projects that are focused on care outside the hospital.
The word mother has many definitions, several of which apply to Mary Beth Whitehead. Among them is the first: ''a woman who has borne a child.'' The person for whom she has been a surrogate - ''a deputy or substitute'' - is Elizabeth Stern. Because Dr. Stern feared that pregnancy might aggravate her mild multiple sclerosis, she and her husband deputized Mrs. Whitehead, by contract, to do what Dr. Stern chose not to do: have his baby. It's that simple.
It's also that complex, because such a contract isn't legal in New Jersey, where the Whiteheads and the Sterns live, or anywhere else in the country. And it's complex because after seeing the daughter she bore William Stern, Mary Beth Whitehead couldn't bear to give her up. If she wins custody of the baby, she has said, she'll give the Sterns visitation rights. If the Sterns win custody, however, they don't want to give those rights to her.
Judge Harvey Sorkow will have to decide the case unaided by statute or case law. The issue cries out for legislation that would minimize the potential for tragic imbroglios like this one. For the surrogate mother business won't just go away. There are too many women desperate for babies and too many women willing to oblige them. Perhaps this trial can serve as a deterrent.
During the last few weeks of the trial, we have all learned a lot about Mary Beth Whitehead, and about ourselves as parents. We've learned, for instance, that it's a good thing that several of the psychiatrists who've testified have never seen some of us playing patty-cake with our kids, or discovered that we too buy them stuffed animals and are not above improving our hair color. Mrs. Whitehead, the accusing experts say, is guilty on all those counts.
Furthermore, she worked as a barroom dancer when the family needed money; and she's married to a man who once had a drinking problem. Put it all together, they say, and you've got a woman unfit to raise her child, at least the one fathered by Mr. Stern, a biochemist. The experts haven't so much as hinted that she's unfit to raise her two children by Mr. Whitehead, a sanitation worker.
We've learned something else, too - that often, failing proven physical or emotional abuse, we're talking about money and class when we talk about a child's ''best interests.'' That's the message encoded in Mrs. Whitehead's notorious four stuffed pandas. The informed - read well-educated -mother knows better than to provide toys that are good for only a hug.
We've also learned that ''surrogate'' motherhood has a terrible potential for causing pain. Unless Judge Sorkow awards joint custody of Baby M to Mary Beth Whitehead and William Stern and their respective spouses, as one authority recommends, either Mrs. Whitehead or the Sterns will suffer a wrenching loss.
Above all, we've been forcefully reminded that surrogacy is not a solution to the problem of female infertility, only to the problem of female infertility among the affluent. Could Mary Beth Whitehead have hired a mother if she'd been the one with a physical problem? ''The rich get rich and the poor get children,'' the old song said. Only a slight paraphrase yields a description of surrogate motherhood. ''The rich get kids and the poor get pregnant.''
On the day in 1978 that a little girl named Louise Brown was conceived in a Petri dish in a British laboratory, humankind took an enormous step into the future. Nine years later, there is still no body of law to govern our residence there - nor are we really sure where to look for one.
The Vatican, however, knows a source for such laws - in the teachings, or Magisterium, of the Roman Catholic Church - and this week it expanded those teachings with a doctrinal statement. It condemns virtually all forms of artificial fertilization and embryo transfer and approves medical interference in procreation only when it assists married couples who engaged in ''normal'' intercourse. The Vatican also calls for laws prohibiting surrogate motherhood and experimentation on living embryos.
Some American Roman Catholic theologians have already dissented from parts of ''Instruction on Respect for Human Life in Its Origin and on the Dignity of Procreation: Replies to Certain Questions of the Day.'' So will many of the laity, to judge by their response to earlier bans on abortion and birth control devices. As for non-Catholics, their response to the new doctrinal statement might be, ''Who's the Vatican to tell me what to do with my life?''
Yet thoughtful people, their consciences engaged by issues like surrogate motherhood, can nevertheless welcome ''Replies to Certain Questions.'' Whether or not they agree with all or much of the doctrinal statement, it offers a considered set of views warranting attention as secular society argues out its bioethical views. And there are some parts of the statement with which it would be hard for anyone to disagree:
''Thanks to the progress of the biological and medical sciences, man has at his disposal ever more effective therapeutic resources; but he can also acquire new powers, with unforeseeable consequences, over human life at its very beginning and in its first stages.'' And, the Vatican statement warns, ''It would on the one hand be illusory to claim that scientific research and its applications are morally neutral; on the other hand one cannot derive criteria for guidance from mere technical efficiency,''
If one could, countless Americans would still be hooked up to life support systems that were, in effect, simply ventilating dead bodies. That they aren't is because they, their physicians and their families recognized the limits of ''technical efficiency'' and asked for legislation that placed lifesaving measures within a broader concept.  *
No state, however, has yet developed legal criteria concerning surrogate motherhood, which involves a very efficient, and indeed simple, technology. As the case of Baby M shows all too clearly, such criteria are sorely needed. The judge who must decide whether the child will live with her father or with the woman he hired to bear their child, will have to do so unaided by statute, case law or even settled public policy. As for the moral aspects of other issues like influencing chromosomic and genetic inheritance - modern society hasn't even touched them yet.
Even Americans who disagree with the Vatican's specific ''replies'' to such tormenting questions can welcome the stimulus to think through ethical responses of their own. ''Medical technology is running ahead of morality,'' a British doctor said when Louise Brown was born. It still is.
The deaths of four Bergenfield, N.J., teen-agers in a suicide pact has touched off bitter debate about how to prevent other young people from doing the same thing. Clear answers are less obvious than the need for careful research.
Suicide pacts are infrequent, but suicide clusters, in which the death of one young person seems to trigger a string of others, have occurred recently in Westchester County; Plano, Tex.; Omaha, Neb., and elsewhere. Suicide is now the second leading cause of death nationally for people 15 to 24 years old, claiming more than 5,000 lives a year.
Community responses typically involve hotlines staffed by volunteers. Representative Gary Ackerman of Queens would authorize grants up to $100,000 for school-based suicide prevention projects. The grants would be awarded on a competitive basis by the U.S. Department of Education. There'd be only $1 million in the first year but funding would then be open-ended. While the intent is admirable, the program warrants skepticism. Why should such an initiative be operated by the Department of Education? Suicide prevention is a mental health issue. The expertise in that area lies in the Department of Health and Human Services, with its National Institute of Mental Health and the Centers for Disease Control.
And what would the new Federal money buy? Suicide prevention is hardly a well-developed art. Experts agree that the most immediate need is for research and experiments that might demonstrate what can work, whether or not through schools. That, in fact, is expected to be a key recommendation of a Federal Task Force on Youth Suicide to report this spring.
Representative Ackerman recognizes this tragic issue in a laudable spirit. Let him now redirect his legislation to foster careful research. The Bergenfield four are best memorialized by a realistic effort to explore the problem, not a premature reach for solutions that may not be there.
Should a prisoner afflicted with AIDS be allowed a break from his parole board? Though the numbers involved are still small, the issue is sure to confront prison and parole officials around the country as the disease spreads. In New York the answer is yes. Of thousands released on parole in the last two years, 50 had AIDS. Many would not have been released had they not developed the disease. Their release is appropriate on humanitarian grounds - but only if they disclose their condition to those on the outside who might be imperilled.
Prisoners in New York and most other states serve indeterminate terms. The judge sets a maximum sentence and parole is possible after serving a third of it. A 12-year term means parole eligibility after four. Only about half are released at that point, after parole boards weigh their prior records, the nature and seriousness of their crime, their attitude in custody and their post-release plans.
None of New York's AIDS-diagnosed prisoners were released before the minimum, but nearly all were released as soon as they had reached it. This suggests that in many such cases, AIDS overrode other factors. That much of a break seems reasonable. Terminally ill inmates had served the minimum punishment; illness would seemingly inhibit commission of new crimes, and release would shift the massive expense of care to private insurers or Medicaid.
Yet the executive law governing the work of the Parole Board requires that release be compatible with the welfare of society. Does the release of an AIDS patient threaten the public welfare? It does so to the extent that the parolee refuses to reveal the affliction to spouse or lover. Thus far, almost all prisoners paroled have voluntarily done so in counseling sessions conducted before their release in the presence of corrections officials.
That's all to the good, but it remains informal policy and ought to be formalized. Unless an AIDS victim discloses his condition to spouse or loved ones, parole should be denied. Refusal to disclose would appropriately be taken as evidence of lack of responsibility toward others, a factor that properly figures in parole decisions.
The state has no business depriving a person of liberty simply because he has AIDS and may rightly grant extra liberty for compassion's sake. But it has every right to insist that the AIDS victim show similar concern for loved ones.
Benjamin Charny is a Soviet mathematician, 49 years old, who is desperately ill with cancer. He wants to join his brother, Leon, in the United States. Soviet officials have denied him permission to leave.
As the human rights problems of the world go, the Charny case is of modest dimensions. It can set no great precedents, shake no institutions. So far as one can tell, the only stakes are the human longings of one family.
But that is what makes the case so puzzling: it and a handful of others like it. Benjamin Charny is one of nine advanced cancer patients in the Soviet Union who are known to have asked permission to join relatives abroad -and been told they cannot. Why? What imaginable official interest can there be in those denials? What interest could outweigh the damaging impression of casual inhumanity?
Leon Charny, who is at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is convinced that there is no logic in the treatment of these cancer victims: no high-level Soviet policy. ''I think it is just bureaucratic,'' he said. ''Someone has to stick his neck out, and bureaucrats don't like to do that.''
Leon is 15 years younger than his brother, and Benjamin brought him up after their parents died. The two tried to leave the Soviet Union in 1979, but only Leon got an exit visa. Benjamin was told that he could not go because he had done secret work. Leon says that was 15 years ago, and the work has all been published in the Soviet Union. Someone just needs to correct the file, he believes.
''If the people at the top had their attention drawn to these cases,'' Leon Charny said, ''I think they would act. It goes against the new Gorbachev image.''
The cancer cases do raise questions about Mikhail Gorbachev: not humanitarian questions so much as political ones. They really go to his understanding of the United States. As he works to improve relations with this country, does he appreciate how Americans react to individual tragedies of this kind? Does he understand what damage they do to the prospect of better relations?
It has been Soviet practice in the past to use individual human rights cases for diplomatic ends. At the time of a summit meeting, for example, some imprisoned dissidents would be released, refuseniks allowed to emigrate, wives allowed to join husbands abroad.
The idea apparently was that those gestures would improve the atmosphere at important diplomatic moments. But surely the negative impact on opinion in the West was cumulatively far greater.
Mr. Gorbachev has seemed to understand that. He has released a significant number of political prisoners, including men as important as Anatoly Koryagin and Iosif Begun. A respected correspondent in Moscow, Patrick Cockburn of The Financial Times of London, wrote last month that ''Mr. Gorbachev and his advisers, unlike their predecessors, are very conscious'' of the effect in the West of ''dramatic individual cases.''
But the cancer patients, small in number, have been dealt with in a way that might have been calculated to offend: slowly, reluctantly, with no sign of understanding.
Last year five cancer victims applied to leave the U.S.S.R. Protest built up on their behalf. Finally four, all but Benjamin Charny, were allowed to leave. The best known of those, Inna Meiman, died three weeks after reaching this country, in January.
A patient in Israel, Michael Shirman, needed a bone marrow transplant from his sister, who was in the Soviet Union. She and her family were only given permission to leave after so much delay that the operation was too late and her brother died.
Now Benjamin Charny and eight others are waiting. They range from 71-year-old Fayina Kogan to 8-year-old Edward Erlikh. How can the Soviet Union benefit by holding up the human resolution of those cases, by letting attention and outrage build?
There are other human rights matters in which the logic of Soviet policy is hard to grasp. For example, about a dozen Soviet-American couples, married and engaged, are still kept apart because the U.S.S.R. will not grant exit visas. But if anything is inexplicable in its embarrassment to the Soviet Union, it is not letting cancer victims spend what may be their last days with their families abroad.
Secretary of State Shultz is due to go to Moscow on April 13. He will no doubt have with him the usual list of human rights cases that we want resolved. But how much better it would be if the Soviet leadership understood that its interest would be served not by dealing with such cases as the cancer victims one by one, anguishingly, but by just letting them go.
The first drug to prolong the lives of AIDS patients received Federal approval last week. That's an encouraging victory in the long campaign against the AIDS epidemic. But the drug comes with a high price - $10,000 per patient for a year's supply - and has bred frustration among AIDS patients unable to get it sooner.
The new drug, AZT or azidothymidine, is seriously toxic but extends life. It is not a cure for AIDS, and its long-term effects remain unknown. But at one time no one could have been sure of finding any effective drug treatment for AIDS. Now one exists, and other promising drugs are in the pipeline.
Under the deliberate medical procedure for testing new drugs, people getting AZT were compared with others receiving a placebo. Without such procedures, ineffective or toxic substances would easily be sanctioned, clouding the virtues of better drugs and ultimately claiming more lives. AZT, first given to a patient in July 1985, has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration in record time. The trial was halted last September, when the first clear evidence of effectiveness became apparent. AZT had to be compared with a placebo but future AIDS drugs, like dideoxycytidine, being developed by Hoffman LaRoche, can probably be tested against AZT as a benchmark.
The problem with AZT now lies in production and cost. Its maker, Burroughs Wellcome, can now supply only 15,000 patients but hopes to double production by the end of the year. Having spent $80 million in developing the drug, the company wants to recoup its investment before new drugs enter the market. But at $10,000 per patient per year, the cost of AZT will be hard for many to bear. Patients who exhaust savings or insurance will depend on state Medicaid programs.
The Government has recommended that states include AZT in their coverage. Yet many who could benefit from AZT may still find themselves unable to pay. Representative Henry Waxman seeks emergency funding for such people, and Burroughs Wellcome will consider helping indigent patients.
For those with AIDS, no advance can come too soon. But compared with other diseases, progress has so far been impressive. Identifying the causative virus and developing a test to screen the blood supply were two milestones. The discovery and brisk testing of an effective drug is a third.
A picture caption yesterday described arrests during a protest rally in lower Manhattan against delays in Government approval of drugs that might combat AIDS. The heading said, ''Homosexuals Arrested at AIDS Drug Protest.''
Although homosexual rights groups took part in the protest, those arrested - for crossing police barricades and blocking traffic - were not identified by sexual orientation. The headline should have described them only as protesters.
Should doctors sell drugs to patients as well as prescribe them? The American Medical Association says no, not as a general rule. But more and more physicians are doing so, raising questions of medical ethics and of the need for law. Without question, it's time to legislate.
There are no official figures on how many doctors sell drugs. Pharmaceutical industry officials estimate that 5 percent of the 75,000 physicians in the New York-New Jersey-Connecticut region have begun doing so in the last two years.
The main reason is the drug-repackaging industry, whose members buy drugs in bulk from manufacturers, package them in single-dose containers and sell them to doctors. Repackagers have become more aggressive in recent years, encouraging doctors to stock their products. For doctors, the lure is an increase in income - up to $40,000 a year. For patients, it's convenience - one-stop shopping.
But there are dangers. The physician/pharmacist has an obvious potential conflict of interest. Might he be tempted to write unnecessary prescriptions? Or to prescribe a drug he sells when another he doesn't sell might be preferable? Or to sell brand-name drugs with high markups when cheaper generics are available?
In addition, the A.M.A. fears the loss of the independent pharmacist's ability to act as a ''check and balance'' on the physician. And many patients would feel pressure, if not outright obligation, to buy drugs from their doctors.
Mindful of those remote situations in which doctors are the only source of prescription drugs, no state has prohibited drug sales by physicians. But since 1980, at least eight have acted to circumscribe the practice. The legal devices range from annual continuing education requirements in pharmacology for physicians to demanding that doctors who sell drugs demonstrate need to do so.
Given the evident dangers and the judgment of the A.M.A. against the practice, every state should begin regulation. Given the availability of independent pharmacists in most places, the tilt should be strongly toward prohibition.
Some 33,000 AIDS cases have been diagnosed so far, and an estimated 1.5 million Americans are already infected with the virus, half a million of them in New York City. In the shadow of the grim disease stalks another - an epidemic of fear. The task is to contain both.
Homosexuals and intravenous drug addicts are still the principal victims but it is clear that AIDS can be spread heterosexually. That puts all sexually active Americans at potential risk and is reason for everyone with new partners to practice safe sex.
That said, it should also be understood that the risk of contracting the AIDS virus varies widely by region, class and race. Though the advice for all individuals is the same - take precautions - the differences in risk create an opportunity for Government to focus its attention where it is most needed: on drug addicts.
One mystery about AIDS concerns the lack of evidence so far of heterosexual transmission beyond the known risk groups and their partners. The people most at risk from heterosexual spread of AIDS are probably those with other sexually transmitted diseases. There are some signs that the virus is not yet spreading fast by this route. Of 1,000 such heterosexuals tested in Denver over the last three years, none but addicts carried the AIDS virus. Among 3,300 people tested at a venereal disease clinic in New York, 26 carry the virus but all are members of risk groups, or their sexual partners are.
Far from being grounds for complacency, this offers a vital chance to keep the epidemic contained. The most serious spread of the AIDS virus is now among addicts. Some 50 to 60 percent of New York's 200,000 heroin users are believed to carry the AIDS virus. Addicts pass the virus to their partners, and women infect their babies. Since drug addicts are a principal bridge to the main population, they should be central to the Administration's attempts to control AIDS.
Yet as the AIDS toll mounts, the Reagan Administration still does little to help control this major epicenter. There are still long waits for addicts who want methadone maintenance. Drug-free rehabilitation programs are overflowing. Addicts who want to quit have no place to go.
Focusing on the drug side of AIDS is not only a Federal duty. Addicts commonly share dirty needles in seedy ''shooting galleries'' and dispensing sterile needles might retard the spread of AIDS. But rigorous local law enforcement officials resist even experiments to test that possibility.
Because so many addicts are black or Hispanic, the burden of AIDS will fall increasingly harshly on these minority communities. Just as homosexual groups have educated their members, black and Hispanic leaders can also perform a life-saving role with warnings against AIDS and drug abuse.
Fear of AIDS may help induce people to protect themselves, and the earlier the epidemic is contained the more lives will be saved. But exaggerated fears risk fostering discrimination or demand for coercive measures that would drive the disease underground. The Administration has made a belated start in educating Americans how to avoid the disease. Now let it, and the rest of us, focus on the likeliest source of infection.
If AIDS is to be stemmed, drug abuse is the place to make a stand.
A deal is a deal, held a New Jersey judge in the surrogate mother case, and a new sense has been added to the phrase ''deliver a baby.''
Now state legislatures will step in to assert the public interest in these private deals. We can expect laws to guarantee responsibility in the case of children born handicapped, or in any way not to the taste of either of the contracting parties; laws to require brokers to provide both surrogates and infertile couples with objective counseling and a reading of their rights; and a mandatory escape hatch - a mother-love option - to enable the child-bearer to abort the agreement just after the child is born.
Thus regulated, surrogacy will grow. In effect is the law of supply and demand: as abortions have risen, the supply of babies for adoption has fallen, and infertility breeds a desperation for a new way to obtain a child. That is why we will see more would-be parents turning to artificial insemination of a woman willing to (a) sell her egg and (b) rent her womb.
In a few years, the egg-selling part of that arrangement will come under close scrutiny by the woman in the childless couple: why should she be denied a plunge into the gene pool? In many cases, her egg is sound; the technology is available to bring about conception of sperm and egg in vitro, ''in glass'' or a petri dish. The next stage will be the increased implantation of already-fertilized eggs in the wombs of hired child-bearers.
A few years after that, pressure will mount to overcome the weakness in the deal: too often, the woman retained to carry an implanted embryo to term may grow attached to her assignment and come to think of the emerging baby as her own.
That mother-love thing must be upsetting to anybody writing a contract in this field. The more sentimental of these mothers or bearers become reluctant to deliver the product; their word is not as good as their bond.
How to overcome this drawback? The mother-love clause, which will be legally required in many states, will surely cause suffering to infertile couples. The answer will be the artificial womb. Reproductive physiologists are hard at work today on that ultimate labor-saving device.
At the Eastern Virginia Medical School at Norfolk, where the first in vitro fertilization in the U.S. took place in 1981, scientific director Gary Hodgen says that we are learning to grow maternal tissue outside the human body, extending the time an embryo grows in the dish before it must be implanted in a human uterus.
At the same time, working down from the other end, ''we've got the zone of survival of prematurely born infants down to 22 weeks, nearly half the gestation period, and to 700 grams, little more than one pound.'' Dr. Hodgen predicts that within a generation the two researches will meet at 14 weeks, for what he calls ''a totally extra-uterine development.''
That means without the need of a mother's body. In an artificial womb, or prenatal incubator, babies will be grown with their nutrients, hormones and temperature controlled by computer - not in Aldous Huxley's ''Brave New World'' but in the U.S.A., announced on the TV news by one of our current anchormen.
Are we ready for that motherless child? Today's controversy over the mere way station called surrogate motherhood, with lawmakers and ethicists scrambling to catch up with judges, demonstrates that we are not.
The Vatican, at least, is clear in its guidance: the Catholic stand is foursquare against scientific appeals to the verdict of nature on fertility.
''Our motive is therapy,'' insists Dr. Hodgen, ''not convenience.'' The scientists working on the artificial womb want to defeat infertility and overcome the risk of birth defects, and want it known they are not driven by a desire to make reproduction easier for couples who are too busy, lazy or fearful to go through nine long months of morning sickness and the pangs of childbirth.
But convenience, the wave of the present, is the danger of the future. The day is coming when ''womb-bearing'' may be seen as nice if you have the time and inclination; like breast-feeding or natural childbirth, it will be undertaken by do-it-yourself gentry with quaint notions of nurturing, or by the poor who don't have insurance coverage.
My position on this consists of a creepy feeling. The patriarch Abraham's wife, Sarah, was barren, which is especially hard on a patriarch; he took a concubine to bear him a child, Ishmael. Later, when Abraham and Sarah unexpectedly begat Isaac, the slave and her child were driven away.
Solutions to infertility lead to desperate measures and unexpected results. On this one, call me Ishmael.
ESSAY
The Baby M case was a tragedy without villains until the very end, and then the judge stepped forward.
His logic was flawed, his sense of mercy nonexistent. He used his power not only to take a child away from its mother, but keep them from ever seeing each other again. He denounced the mother needlessly and brutally.
Harvey R. Sorkow, a judge in the Superior Court of New Jersey, called Mary Beth Whitehead manipulative, impulsive and exploitive. This is character assassination from the bench. It was delivered through impulsive aggressiveness. It was an attempt to manipulate opinion against Mrs. Whitehead. It exploited the judge's position on the bench.
The judge performed one public service. He brought out for the whole world to see what lawyers talk about only behind the hand.
There are judges known for their nastiness, for embarrassing lawyers for the pleasure of it, haranguing defendants, using their authority to terrorize courtrooms. Usually only people in the courtroom know because most trials get no public attention.
The lawyers know they may be appearing before that judge again one day. So they swallow it, and judges who humiliate the helpless before them get away with it; their arrogance grows.
In the courtroom, Judge Sorkow made his distaste for Mrs. Whitehead plain. Ruling against her was one thing. But he used the power of the bench as a brand against her. She was simply a party in a custody case, not a criminal, and even if he did not care for her traits he should not have added public humiliation to personal loss.
Even lawyers not opposed to the idea of surrogacy were startled by the construction of the judge's decision. He said that the surrogacy contract was totally valid, without engaging with a central issue. Contract laws never envisioned surrogate motherhood. Can they now be extended to cover it without appropriate legislation?
At the same time, the judge insisted that the key to the case was the welfare of the baby. If that were so, there was no need to rule on the contract.
If there was not much logic, there was plenty of motive. The judge not only wanted to give the father and his wife custody but to refuse Mrs. Whitehead visitation rights - ''terminate'' her. Under the law he would have had to have found that Mrs. Whitehead had abused or abandoned Baby M, which he could not do.
He decided that the surrogacy contract provided for termination and was legal. He turned the baby over to the father, terminated Mrs. Whitehead and played his ace.
He called the Sterns into his chambers and within minutes rammed through an adoption process that normally takes weeks or months. The purpose plainly was to make Mrs. Whitehead's position even more difficult by an adoption that would suddenly make another woman the baby's legal mother. Mrs. Whitehead's lawyer says he was not even informed of what was going on in the judge's chambers.
Appeals judges will find little in the record on an issue that might have undercut the judge's elegant philosophy that a ''deal is a deal'' no matter what.
That issue is the changes in a woman's body and mind during pregnancy that bind her to the baby and could make any prenatal agreement to give the baby away suddenly horrifying. The defense counsel says the judge would not permit expert opinion on that subject.
It seems to me that a surrogate mother, like a pregnant woman planning to give up a child for adoption, should be allowed a grace period to change her mind. That might cause sorrow to surrogate fathers, which could be somewhat assuaged with shared custody - not the cruel cutoff that Judge Sorkow ruled Mrs. Whitehead must endure forever.
That would mean that fathers in surrogacy could demand a grace period.
Fine, provided they assumed financial responsibility. Few rich women become surrogate mothers.
Escape clauses for surrogate mother and father would make both far more cautious about the idea. That is exactly the point. In the absence of law, Judge Sorkow simply should have said that in decency he was not able to make a drastic decision.
He could have ordered some form of shared custody until the law was made clear. Not a perfect solution but better than validating a contract about human destinies in the absence of any guidance from society. And better than rending the mother forever from the baby, and then slapping her across the face with denunciation.
Mrs. Whitehead descended into a public hell of exposure and humiliation to try to keep her child. This forced us all to face surrogate motherhood as an issue that touched our own beliefs and souls. For that she deserved respect, perhaps even a touch of gratitude, certainly not a judge's vilification.
ON MY MIND
Here are some money figures that have been in the news lately: $50 million - This is roughly the amount various bidders paid for the Duchess of Windsor's jewelry. $39.9 million - This is the sum paid for a Van Gogh sunflower by somebody who doesn't want to be identified. $11.75 million - This is the minimum payment guaranteed Marvin Hagler for appearing in a boxing match last night with Sugar Ray Leonard. $11 million - This is the minimum payment guaranteed Mr. Leonard. $8 million - This is the amount, according to the Rev. Oral Roberts, that God said the Reverend's flock had better come across with if they wanted Mr. Roberts to live to see another April. The money was paid; Oral Roberts lives. $17,500 - This is the amount William Stern contracted to pay Mary Beth Whitehead and the Infertility Clinic for services that produced the person widely known as Baby M. What is striking about these figures is the wide disparity between the amounts spent on frivolity, triviality and grossness and the piffling sum spent on creating a human being.
At a cost of $17,500 per human being, the $50 million spent by the buyers of the Duchess's jewels could have produced 2,857 brand new human beings. The $39.9 million spent by the mystery buyer of the Van Gogh could have produced 2,280.
I am not saying it was wrong for them to spend their millions on canvas and baubles. Surviving in this world requires a lot of ego support. Some people can get it from owning famous gewgaws. And anyhow, they might say, what about the population explosion? Isn't it better to have our $89.9 million spent on sterile, inanimate objects than to have it churning out 5,137 new human beings?
The argument is not so easy as regards the $8 million spent on the Rev. Oral Roberts, which could have produced 457 new lives had it not been earmarked for keeping Mr. Roberts from being ''taken home'' by God.
Here, it seems to me, we are treading very close to philosophical quicksand. Wouldn't a good Christian gladly choose to go ''home'' if he knew that doing so would bring 457 new souls into the world?
The question is beyond my scope. My only interest here is in the curiously low value placed on new human beings, especially at a time when childless parents are desperate to expand their families.
The explanation may be that until now big-time entrepreneurs have been too delicate to cash in on the demand for babies by bringing the full power of American industrial know-how to bear on the baby-supply problem.
Judge Harvey R. Sorkow's decision in the Baby M case, however, now makes such delicacy look quaintly old-fashioned. In saying that a contract to produce a baby for pay is no more assailable than any other contract, he gives legal blessing to babymaking as business.
Legislatures or appeals courts may cancel this invitation for free enterprise to do its worst, but if they don't, better order your baby fast because that $17,500 price will soon be as gone as the 1936 Ford.
Prices in the baby market can easily be hoisted by skillful use of hype. You can see a good example of it at work in the multimillion-dollar payday Messrs. Hagler and Leonard enjoyed last night in Las Vegas because a lot of people had been persuaded that matching the two was like matching Jack Dempsey and Muhammad Ali.
Legitimizing a baby industry opens the door for marketing experts to hype the quality of its tiny merchandise by hyping the production record of its manufacturers. It's disgusting to imagine the catalogue descriptions of the company's producers:
''Has already produced five perfect little beauties . . . World-famous pediatrician says, 'Her knack for turning out stunningly flawless little darlings who look exactly like their fathers is absolutely uncanny' . . . Her last three were accepted by Yale before leaving the obstetrics floor . . . If perfection is what you demand in your child, act immediately to sign this classic child-bearer while she is still between engagements . . . Price? If you have to ask, you can't afford her.''
There will be plenty of customers willing to pay through the nose once hype sets its hook in the marketplace. Look at all the people in the world competing with each other to shell out millions for jewels and paintings. You can be sure there are plenty among them ready to pay several million for the right to boast not only that they got a perfect specimen, but also that they paid a record price to the woman who made it.
OBSERVER
Belatedly, New York City and State officials are beginning to make good on a decade of broken promises to the mentally ill.
In the 1970's, New York turned tens of thousands out of big mental hospitals, and denied admission to tens of thousands more. The rationale: They would be better cared for in community-based programs. Yet state officials, bowing to hospital towns and unions, then refused such programs the necessary funds. Often, the mentally ill were left homeless.
Now, officials are getting together on a plan for community care. In New York City, it would expand by 1,600 beds the existing state-run community residences for the homeless mentally ill who require constant treatment and supervision, and add 2,600 places to the rudimentary network of residences for the homeless mentally ill capable of some functioning in the outside world.
The Governor and the Mayor finally understand the need to repair the broken promise of deinstitutionalization. They have approved the four-year plan; now the Legislature has to vote the money, $1 million in the first year. It's a small price to begin redeeming a big promise.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
To stop the spread of AIDS, President Reagan advises virginity unto the marriage altar and monogamy ever after. That would probably do it, all right, but the President has yet to follow through with advice on how to bring back those two old lifesavers.
I say ''bring back'' because I have the impression that both were already long gone from the American scene by the time the Puritans made Hester wear the ''A.''
Lately, of course, you might have got the impression that nobody in years has even heard of virginity and monogamy. This is the consequence of science, which came up with the contraceptive pill and penicillin. After that, an entire generation wallowed in a vision of paradise: sex without consequences.
I use the word ''wallowed'' by design. With the pill to undo fertility, antibiotics to remove the danger of venereal disease and easily available marijuana to give their congress a pickup when regularity and unconsequentiality made it pall, we had the first generation in history able, in Joseph Epstein's fine phrase, to enjoy splendor both in and on the grass.
Now it turns out there are consequences after all: AIDS. The consequence of that is that in family newspapers you are now likely to read the word ''condom.''
These are bad days indeed. I don't like seeing ''condom'' in my newspaper any more than President Reagan does, and I don't like having the great TV anchormen of America saying ''condom'' when the whole family, including Grandmother, is gathered in the parlor for news of the latest murders and bombings.
On the other hand, the idea of AIDS being circulated around town is even more distasteful. In bad days you have to settle for the lesser evil.
President Reagan is trying to wiggle out of this bleak necessity when he says the trick is virginity followed by monogamy. When the health authorities in his Government propose educating American youth in the lifesaving efficacy of condoms his response is a wince, detectable in his suggestion that ''abstinence'' is the best policy.
There is a distinctly nutty quality in the President talking about abstinence. It is as though he were utterly out of touch with his own world, which is show business.
Anybody who rents a movie for the VCR, or buys a record, or reads a popular novel, or turns on the telly during soap opera time knows that show business is not preaching virginity and monogamy.
It is portraying a gaudy variety of sexual doings as though they were commonplace pastimes of American life, like getting a shoeshine. When is the last time you saw a movie or TV show in which somebody got a shoeshine? That would be really strange nowadays.
What is not strange in the least is the picture of bare people in carnal embrace. What makes the publisher groan in despair is the manuscript of a new novel without an ''obligatory sex scene.''
What is any sensitive observer to conclude from contemporary show business except that sexual enterprises once considered the special province of famous weirdos like Caligula and the Marquis de Sade are now as routine as a shop at the supermarket?
Show business is where young people learn how to live their lives. The World War II generation learned everything from the great movie stars: how to kiss a girl, how to smoke a cigarette, how to comb their hair, what drink to order from the bartender, and why both male and female should not have sexual relations before marriage. (A girl who did so would die before the end of the show, a boy would probably die violently. In either case, they would not live happily ever after.) Yes, youngsters of America, I recall those lessons myself. They were hammered into you two, three times a week in movies of stunning implausibility. Virginity was the ticket to happiness, which was monogamy ever after. Millions of us learned those lessons.
And you know what? Practically nobody lived by them. After lapsing, some people felt guilty and vowed never to lapse again. Many more, I suspect, lapsed and, discovering that they were not struck down by celestial bullets, went on to lapse again and again.
Still, the lapsing of that age was nothing compared with what has been going on since the pill and penicillin made sexual activity unconsequential.
Perhaps Mr. Reagan can get the national lapse rate down to where it was 40 years ago by persuading show-biz bosses to depict their promiscuous performers as people doomed by their self-indulgence. With AIDS among us, that's no longer implausible.
OBSERVER
The world is a pretty crazy place, and most people have little power to do anything about it. Federal District Judge Barrington D. Parker is an exception. He is the judge who'll decide whether John Hinckley Jr. should be granted a 12-hour unescorted pass from a Washington D.C. mental hospital to visit his parents on Easter.
The reason John Hinckley is in the hospital is that in 1981 he tried to kill President Reagan, and in the process severely wounded his press secretary, James Brady. But now, a psychiatrist has testified, the assassin's mental state has improved enough to justify the brief release. The doctor says he has ''shown himself to be responsible and to be remorseful.''
At some point, the public has to accept some risk in dealing with criminally committed patients who have any hope of recovery. But this case has not reached that point. Consider Mr. Hinckley's correspondence. He has written about planning escapes and he recently wrote to Theodore Bundy, a convicted murderer on death row, to express sympathy for his ''awkward position.''
There's reason to feel sorry for the Hinckley family, but more reason to feel sorry for the Bradys - and potential other victims. Judge Parker can bring a little sanity to this world by keeping John Hinckley where he belongs: in a mental institution.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
The most constructive stand for Presidential candidates on the difficult issue of AIDS is to unite in avoiding it as a partisan issue. As a people, we united to defeat Hitler. So must we now unite to defeat AIDS in a nonpartisan way.
Candidates in both parties understandably are afraid of the issue. ''Everyone is trying to avoid this issue because it combines homosexuality, sexual disease and death, matters on which most of us wish to be unenlightened.'' This quotation came from an aide to a Presidential candidate and describes the explosive potential of acquired immune deficiency syndrome as a political issue. One need only add religion for a real political witch's brew.
The complicated emotional, moral, economic and constitutional overtones of the problem do not lend themselves to the simplification of political posturing. Indeed, immense harm and an increase in deaths could result from treating AIDS as a black-and-white political issue. Instead, let us separate the components of this tangled skein:
Homosexuality. Although in New York City some 33 percent of AIDS cases are found among intravenous drug users, homophobia still obscures clear thinking about the disease. In fact, the homosexual community has radically altered its sexual habits, as has been seen by the precipitous decline of venereal and other sexually transmitted diseases among homosexual people.
Further, that community has taken the leadership in urging education and compassionate care for people with AIDS. Our culture's latent homophobia should not skew our dealing head-on with a disease that endangers the whole population.
Religion. ''The Scribes and the Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery. And when they had set her in the midst, they said unto him, 'Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act. Now Moses and the law commanded us that such should be stoned; but what sayest Thou?' . . . . He lifted up himself and said unto them, 'He that is without sin among you, let him first cast the stone at her.' '' Religious people who judge individuals with AIDS should take this text seriously. Would God bring the tragedy of AIDS on a newborn baby in some wild and primitive cosmic rage over a sexual ''sin''? And why would not a just God visit other sinners with disease and death? That AIDS is God's punishment of sinners is a theologically indefensible position.
Morality. Abstinence, the most certain way to prevent AIDS, should be encouraged. However, there always will be thousands of people who have sexual relations outside of marriage, since about 40 percent of American adults are unmarried. It is thus imperative that explicit safe sex education, including promotion of the use of condoms, be carried out in all sectors, especially schools. The United Kingdom has mailed an explicit pamphlet on the subject to every household.
Economics. With Federal deficits growing at an alarming rate, spending has become a dirty word on the campaign trail. Though finding an AIDS cure will require a substantial outlay for research - far more than has been given so far - it offers a potential savings of billions of dollars in hospital costs, given the current rate of infection, through the 1990's.
Civil liberties vs. public health. A rule of thumb in a nation dedicated to individual rights is that no invasion of civil rights is permissible unless a clear and overwhelming public good is served. Medical authorities do not believe that universal testing would be helpful. Participants in the recent conference on AIDS at the Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta were virtually unanimous in saying that universal testing was not justified. Decisions in this area should be recommended by epidemiologists, not politicians.
Those of us who have accompanied AIDS victims as they travel into overwhelming pain, disfigurement and horror implore politicians to avoid partisan stands on AIDS and to join hands in encouraging compassionate thinking and a crash program to provide resources for care, research and education.
Appellate courts willing, Baby M has finally found a permanent home. But if the future of Baby M - now Melissa Stern - is assured, that of Babies N, O, P and others born out of surrogate arrangements is not. That's why the states need legislation to establish public policy on firmer footing than that provided by individual emotion-laden cases.
In New York State, the welcome vehicle for such debate is a bill sponsored by Senators John Dunne and Mary Goodhue, which will have its second public hearing May 7. The bill, though not ideal, proposes to deal intelligently with the three issues central to any discussion of surrogacy: the legality of such arrangements, their potential for exploiting women and the best interests of the child.  $ ? * * *
Dunne-Goodhue permits the practice of surrogacy. To do otherwise, its authors argue, may well be unconstitutional.
Second, the bill helps minimize the exploitative aspects of surrogacy by setting stringent criteria that must be met before insemination takes place. All parties would first apply for a court to approve a contract. The court would then investigate the health, finances and stability of the intended parents and receive certification of the wife's infertility. The surrogate mother would be examined by a physician and by a psychologist who will determine if she and her huband, if any, are capable of giving up a child. During pregnancy she would make all relevant medical decisions, including whether to undergo an abortion. The court also would insure independent legal counsel for both parties and approve all fees. Fees are, of course, the sticking point for many opponents of surrogacy who perceive them as proof that such arrangements are just another form of baby-selling. But to prohibit the fees is to prohibit the practice; most surrogate mothers say they wouldn't have participated without compensation.
Finally, Dunne-Goodhue aims to insure the child's well-being by making parental obligations like support enforceable from the time of conception. The intended parents can't, in other words, change their minds if they don't like what they see once the baby is born.
Even the most fervent proponents of surrogacy may pause before the severity of one of Dunne-Goodhue's provisions: The surrogate mother must cede her parental rights at childbirth. To give her time in which to change her mind, the bill argues, is to deny the infertile couple the certainty of getting custody despite their complete compliance with the agreement. Furthermore, a fierce custody battle, a la Baby M, might then ensue.
Many Americans might endorse such a provision; two-thirds of those queried in a recent poll wanted Baby M to go to the Sterns. But they were responding to a specific case, one in which the child's father seemed the more attractive parent. In another case, with other parents, public judgment might be different. Society can try to insure that there will never be another Baby M case. But can it insure that there will never be another mother who changes her mind?
The stir over the cause of Representative Stewart McKinney's death ought not distract from his achievements as a public servant. Mr. McKinney, who died last week at age 56, was a man of compassion. His constituency for 17 years was Connecticut's ''Gold Coast'' Fairfield County, and he was well to do himself. But he was distinguished by his concern for the poor and powerless, from Bridgeport to Saigon.
Mr. McKinney was a liberal Republican; few in his party voted more often than he did against the Reagan Administration. As a member of the banking committee, he had a major hand in shaping Federal housing and urban development programs, as well as aid for New York City and Chrysler. On an issue with little appeal outside Washington, he co-authored the capital's home rule law 14 years ago. This year he took on unpaid parental leaves and aid to the homeless.
But the legislation that sets him apart is the Amerasian Immigration Act of 1982, allowing children of American servicemen in Asia to immigrate on the same basis as the children of citizens.
''These are our children,'' he said, ''abandoned in a society which does not recognize them as people because they are not pure.''  TOPICS OF THE TIMES
Remarkably, the American Civil Liberties Union still adheres to a policy statement on AIDS that it issued in April 1986. The organization opposes testing for the AIDS virus unless a person wants it. It opposes reporting of cases of AIDS by doctors, hospitals and laboratories. It opposes tracing those with whom the harborer of the virus has had sexual contact. All in the name of privacy.
Though it may come as a surprise to most of its members, too often in important ways the A.C.L.U. is a conservative, backward-looking organization, trapped in vested doctrine. It clings to once useful concepts that are inappropriate to current problems. Like the French military, which prepared for World War II by building the Maginot Line, which was nicely adapted to the trench warfare of World War I, the A.C.L.U. sometimes hauls up legal arguments effective in old libertarian battles but irrelevant to those at hand.
For example, take literary censorship cases in the 1960's. In opposing censorship, the A.C.L.U. argued that publication of certain books created no ''clear and present danger'' to society. The ''clear and present danger'' argument, in the 1920's, had been used to protect from prosecution people who expressed political opinions without direct incitement to law-breaking. But it had nothing to do with the question of whether and how far the First Amendment restricted anti-obscenity statutes.
Those who sought to suppress books they considered obscene did not argue that the books would cause an immediate conflagration. Rather, they had in mind the books' continuing effect on sexual morality. Censors presented the familiar slippery-slope argument: If the courts allowed the open publication of ''Lady Chatterley's Lover,'' the next thing you know they would allow ''Tropic of Cancer'' and, after that, we would sink so low as to publish ''Fanny Hill.'' (That, of course, is exactly what happened.) Since the prospect of a gradual deterioration in morality over a period of time was put forward to justify suppression, it made no sense to argue that there was no immediate and present danger of instantaneous destruction of morality, as the A.C.L.U. did. Instead, the answer, as the Supreme Court held, was that a book that possessed some social value was part of the press, which the First Amendment guarded.
The A.C.L.U., again looking backward, today cannot depart from a concept of privacy that worked well for liberals in abortion cases heard by the courts. The nation - indeed, the world - faces the worst plague in history. The A.C.L.U., however, declares that efforts to deal with it are less important than the preservation of privacy. It finds no ''compelling health purpose'' in testing except at the option of an individual, in any requirement that test results showing the presence of the virus be identified and reported and in the tracing of sexual contacts.
In justifying these imperious pronouncements, the A.C.L.U. cites ''basic constitutional guarantees,'' ''individual rights'' and ''civil rights.'' These terms are far too vaporous to support a constitutional restriction on action by the states. A more concrete prohibition is required. The only one the A.C.L.U. cites is ''the right to privacy.''
There has been so much talk about privacy that it is worth recalling that the word ''privacy'' does not appear in the Constitution. The Supreme Court has, indeed, inferred a right of privacy in certain cases. But it carefully has limited its decisions to cases before it, and has explicitly denied that there exists any broad general right of privacy that can stand in the way of legislation important to the public welfare.
The Justices, or a majority of them, found a right of privacy in the First Amendment when someone was prosecuted for viewing pornographic material in his own home. They found it in the Fourth and Fifth Amendments when police behavior or other criminal enforcement tactics were too intrusive. They found it in the Bill of Rights generally when they sanctioned giving out birth control information. They found it in the 14th Amendment when they gave qualified approval to a personal choice on abortion. In these decisions, however, the Court took pains to make it clear that though a constitutional right of privacy exists in certain contexts, the right is ''not unqualified.'' It is subject to a measure of ''state regulation,'' and it must be weighed against ''important state interests.''
There is a difference of opinion in the medical profession about the danger of AIDS, but these differences all lie in a spectrum extending only from the terribly dangerous to the utterly disastrous. And no scientist sees any early development of a cure or vaccine.
In these circumstances, the situation we face falls well within the borders of the area in which the Court has said that the constitutional right of privacy must yield to considerations of public welfare. Attempts to limit the spread of the disease by compulsory testing, reporting and contact-tracing can reasonably be presumed to have some restraining effect on the travels of the virus.
One can advocate personal rights that go beyond the definitions the courts have given. Though the A.C.L.U. is basing its position on what it asserts are ''constitutional guarantees,'' let us make it easier for the A.C.L.U. by shifting the issue from the law of privacy as it exists to the law as one might think it ought to be.
Is it good that there be testing that goes beyond an individual's request for it? Is it good that there be identification and reporting of those who carry the virus? Is it good that there be tracing of those to whom it may be reasonably supposed the virus has been transmitted and who may in turn transmit it to others?
Obviously these things are good. Are they, in the light of what we know about the disease, less important than privacy? The answer is plain, except to those so infatuated with personal rights as to ignore the sorest community needs.
Part of the horror of the disease is its certain outcome. The A.C.L.U., rather than receding from a cherished doctrine, would allow a number of people - perhaps a very large number - to die this horrid death. The organization apparently believes in a divine right of privacy, which reigns supreme above reason and common decency.
On a recent afternoon in Albany, N.Y., we listened to the stories of a number of New Yorkers who are among the 37 million Americans - a number that grows by about one million a year - who do not have health insurance for themselves or their families. In Albany, as in other places around the nation, we heard of the terrible dilemmas faced when illness or accident strikes a family that is not protected by health coverage.
New York, however, has a particularly cruel wrinkle - a provision so restrictive as to exclude Medicaid coverage for families whose members are working but whose wages are nonetheless below the poverty level.
Jane Doe - a pseudonym for a Genesco, N.Y., woman who is rearing two children by herself - is one victim of the state's policy. After three years on the welfare rolls, during which she earned an associate's degree in accounting, she recently took three part-time jobs and is also studying for a bachelor's degree. She could not find any jobs in accounting, and none of her part-time jobs provide health insurance. Ms. Doe has high blood pressure, her 16-year-old son requires treatment twice a year for curvature of the spine and her 9-year-old daughter has asthma.
But Ms. Doe's family is about to lose its health coverage under Medicaid because her income of $9,700 a year, which is below the poverty level, is above New York's earnings limit. She cannot afford the $2,000 it would cost to purchase health insurance through one of her employers.
Ms. Doe could quit her jobs and go back on welfare where she would qualify for Medicaid, but she wants to work, even though it puts her and her family in jeopardy. Ms. Doe's predicament is all too common.
New York State's policy for qualifying people for Medicaid makes matters worse by discriminating against families. In New York, a family of two - say, a mother and child - can qualify for Medicaid if they are at the poverty level. But a family of four will not qualify for Medicaid if the family earns more than two-thirds of the poverty level. The bigger the family, the worse it gets. A working family of six that earns more than 51 percent of the poverty level salary loses access to Medicaid.
The result of this policy is that some 700,000 New Yorkers, including 300,000 children, who are living below the poverty level, do not qualify for Medicaid. Some 75 percent of these people live in families in which at least one member is working but at a job that is not covered by health insurance. New York can take immediate measures to provide access to health care for these families struggling to stay above the economic brink. James R. Tallon Jr., chairman of the Health Committee in the New York Assembly, has introduced legislation that would assure that all New York families below the poverty line, without regard to family size, qualify for Medicaid. Passage of this bill would correct a particularly egregious wrong in the health care system.
But New York's system, as that of the entire nation, will continue to be only a torn quilt, which we try to patch with measures that only go half way. As important as these intermediate steps are to many people, we need to build our nation's health care system out of a whole cloth, through a national health care program.
During our years in Government service, we both saw a steady increase in Americans' access to health care. In the last several years, there has been little concern for those who are losing health care insurance.
We believe that the tide is again turning. We sense a growing recognition that the United States can no longer afford a health system that commits huge amounts of its national resources in order to supply care to a shrinking proportion of our people.
We fully expect Congress to adopt comprehensive national health care coverage in the next few years. In the meantime, we hope that Governor Cuomo and the people of New York will provide health care to Ms. Doe and the hundreds of thousands of other New York families who, while living below the poverty line, do not now receive Medicaid.
Why not compel everyone to be tested for AIDS as the basis for halting further spread of the virus? That's a natural first thought to anyone who ponders the deadly epidemic. But it's only a first thought. That some senior Administration officials argue for mandatory AIDS testing shows how late in the day they have arrived at step one.
William Bennett, the Secretary of Education, wants AIDS tests to be given to everyone admitted to the hospital or applying for a marriage license. Gary Bauer, a senior White House aide, says opponents of such tests are promoting ''a bizarre type of enforced ignorance.'' The Public Health Service now says that all immigrants will be screened for AIDS virus.
There are at least six reasons for believing that advocates of general forced testing are opinionated, hasty or poorly informed.
Lesson One: Don't drive victims underground. Homosexuals and intravenous drug abusers, the principal victims, are not mainstream America. Living at the edge of social tolerance in many states, they face plenty of discrimination already. Their cooperation in changing their own behavior is crucial in slowing the disease's spread to other groups. Mandatory testing is the surest way to discourage them from contact with health authorities.
Lesson Two: A consensus is not a conspiracy. No one should lightly deny public health officials the tools they need to combat AIDS, including use of the AIDS antibody tests. What public officials want -for the reason cited above - is more voluntary testing, not mandatory testing. Mr. Bennett seems to believe that the Federal public health agency has fallen under the influence of homosexuals who oppose mandatory testing for self-interested reasons. But the reason for agreement is not conspiracy. Both groups believe voluntary testing is the better way of halting AIDS.
Lesson Three: Why in hospitals? Hospital patients are predominantly the elderly and the very young, two categories least likely to have AIDS. Why does Mr. Bennett propose to look there for the virus instead of among high-risk groups? Because hospitals are where testing is easiest. So too argued the drunkard who lost his keys in the dark and explained he was searching for them under the lamppost because the light was better.
Lesson Four: Like it or not, morals have changed. Many states require a syphilis test for those seeking a marriage license. Mr. Bennett can't understand why an AIDS test isn't given too. The reason is that a minute proportion of known syphilis cases are detected this way. New York recently dropped the syphilis test because the results were not worth the cost, and because of suspicion that some couples nowadays have sex before marriage. The same logic applies to AIDS, but there's another, far more cogent reason.
Lesson Five: False alarms have grim consequences. The two present tests for AIDS virus are highly specific but even in conjunction are not totally accurate. The danger of ''false positives'' -diagnosing individuals as exposed to AIDS when they are not - is probably minuscule with high-risk populations. But the danger grows rapidly when screening large populations at low risk.
According to a paper to be published shortly by Michael J. Barry and colleagues at the Harvard School of Public Health, the two standard AIDS tests would identify 28 true positives, 2 false negatives and 11 false positives when applied to a low-risk population, defined as 30 AIDS cases per 100,000 people. What those figures say is that, for every 28 cases correctly diagnosed, the tests risk falsely informing 11 individuals that they carry the virus of a deadly disease and should never have children. Without guarantees of confidentiality, the insurers, employers, landlords and classmates of these 11 individuals may also learn, and act, on the false information. What a burden for mandatory testers to bear.
Lesson Six: AIDS makes a poor political football. Mr. Bauer believes that public health officials have few qualms in urging explicit sex education for young children, offensive as that may be to conservatives. But when it comes to testing, ''the left's political agenda takes over.'' He says, ''Either this is potentially the Black Death or it isn't.'' In fact, no one knows how widely AIDS will spread, but it's prudent to take precautions. Teaching teen-agers safe sex is an effective precaution - and mandatory testing is not.
AIDS is a medical issue. Those who politicize it, or see political motives where none exist, are seriously delaying national policy on AIDS and measures to save lives. The only known way to curb AIDS is to persuade people to change behavior. The Administration still has not mounted a massive public education program of the sort already under way in several European countries. The Secretary of Education should be leading the charge for education about AIDS and voluntary testing. Mandatory testing should be his last thought, not his first.
At a time when virtually everyone agrees the welfare system ought to nudge recipients toward work and self-sufficiency, a key facet of New York's system pushes the opposite way.
Because of absurdly restrictive income standards, most working poor families in New York are ineligible for Medicaid health insurance coverage. With costs of private health insurance rising, many such families must choose either to go without insurance or go on welfare to qualify for Medicaid.
The restriction on eligibility apparently developed piecemeal over the years as legislators sought to tailor Medicaid to needy elderly people, most of whom are in one- and two-person households. The eligibility rules reflect that bias. The maximum income levels of $5,000 for an individual and $7,200 for a two-person family compare favorably with the 1986 poverty levels of $5,574 for one person and $7,133 for a family of two.
Beyond that, however, a gap opens and grows wider as family size increases. The Medicaid eligibility scale rises by a mere $100 for each extra family member. The poverty standard for a family of three, $8,738, exceeds the Medicaid eligibility standard by $1,438. A family of seven would be in poverty with earnings up to $16,976. But it would be ineligible for Medicaid after earning $7,700.
Assemblyman James Tallon, a Binghamton Democrat, would rectify the problem with a bill to set new income eligibility standards at roughly 95 percent of the poverty standard for any family size. It also would adjust the standards annually by the same amounts as the increases in Federal Supplemental Security Income program. Mr. Tallon estimates these changes would add 79,000 New Yorkers to the Medicaid program, about half of them children, at a cost of $86 million.
That's a substantial sum, though it's likely to be offset somewhat by savings on the lifelong health and other social problems of children now denied adequate health care. More to the point, it makes no sense to preach the value of work to welfare recipients and then erect an obstacle course for those who take it to heart.
Apparently, the idea has been around for some time, but happily I managed to avoid it until the ad appeared in the paper: surrogate staffs for surrogate bosses.
It is called employee leasing and it is a jewel of an idea when you think about it: You fire your entire staff, which is then hired by the leasing company, which then rents your staff back to you. But it is not yours anymore; the staff belongs to the leasing company and you become a client.
For a fee, the leasing company pays the employees' wages, taxes and benefits, and also takes care of ''all your recruitment headaches'' with its ''human resource professionals.'' I think that means hiring other leased employees for you.
The staff is supposed to like being fired and rented back since the leasing company can arrange better benefit packages than most small employers. The boss, or ex-boss, likes it because he gets rid of paperwork. Some unions are not wild about it but there are now about 350 companies leasing out some 250,000 people to their former bosses.
When I read the ad I felt that fine, light flush that is the forerunner of full-fledged righteous indignation. But that soon disappeared because I realized that the idea was totally in keeping with our way of doing things - the surrogate life.
Surrogate motherhood is too new and far too emotional to be a real part of the movement yet. It may grow but the passions of the Baby M case probably put it back a decade or so.
There are forms of surrogacy that are built into our economic and social systems and serve both. Day care centers for very small children, for instance. Homes for the aged, for another.
It was only a few decades ago that turning a preschool child over to organized care during the day would have been horrifying to most mothers and fathers. And, of course, the idea of putting your parent in an old-age home was a shudder.
Now both ideas are part of our lives and day care centers are accepted, appropriately, not only as economic necessities but social liberators for working mothers.
But we don't have to pretend that they are not surrogates for the direct family care that used to be taken for granted.
Our working lives, our social lives, even our love lives, have become wrapped up in surrogacies, which means they have moved at least one step away from us.
One of the best parties I ever went to was in Austin, Tex. It was a few years ago, at the home of Ann Richards, the Texas state treasurer. I realized later why I had such a good time. None of it was catered, a form of surrogacy that dominates evenings in most big cities - neither food nor entertainment.
The crayfish were cooked in Ann's kitchen and she spread them out on the table herself. There was music -not a hired pianist but some guest picking on a guitar. Lots of singing -not from a cassette player but by actual live guests. There was a great stand-up comic - a novelist with a bit of buzz-on - right there in the living room, not on television.
And the guests were not catered either - Ann invited them herself for her own party.
In New York and Los Angeles, there are parties where a surrogate hostess serves up catered guests. An out-of-town businessman or merchant wants to make a splash with a new product or service. He asks around, finds a prominent woman who knows everybody. She becomes his hostess for the night - decides who will make profitable guests and sends out the invitations in her name.
Sometimes there is a fee, or he will put business her way later, or contribute handsomely to one of her favorite charities. Nobody is hurt; but it is all one large step away from real party-giving, though nobody says so.
Restaurant-going is becoming a surrogate for hospitality at home, and you can get what amounts to surrogate exercise - spa machinery that moves your arms and legs for you so you don't have to work up too much of a sweat.
On college campuses during exam time, ''Pride and Prejudice'' and other classics are best sellers - the video cassettes, of course, not the actual books. Let video do your reading!
If you want to show love with a gift, don't bother buying one. Ring up any big department store. Nobody has to know it was picked by a surrogate selecter on surrogate time. They will even put a funny card inside, a surrogate for a note you might have had to word yourself.
In California, there is a dandy substitute for bothering with nature and that grubbiness. Rent a lawn by the yard. They will roll it up and take it away if you fall behind on payments or happen to die. Then your survivors, if inclined, can pick up a phone and dial a prayer.
ON MY MIND
Fresh from a tortellini salad with high-cal dressing, a friend who works in midtown strolled through the International Paper Company Plaza on West 45th Street recently and found that she was not the only New Yorker who needed to walk off her lunch.
Because the plaza has its own take-out restaurant and is near a lot of fast-fooderies and vendors, it is a good place to see what New Yorkers are eating these days. What they're eating, our friend says, is a lot. Forget alfalfa sprouts. Forget plain yogurt. Forget the ascetic apple. She saw sandwiches too big for the mouth to get around. She saw more items than she could count shoved into pockets of pita. And she saw the shamelessly caloric old standbys: Lasagna. Fries. Burgers piled on burgers. And - just like hers - tortellini salads with high-cal dressings.
Is the diet dead? It's certainly not showing much life at the corner of 45th and Sixth.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
The Administration in Washington is opposed to making sure that a representative of the homosexual community is named to a panel to study the AIDS plague and what it might mean for the whole country. It shows vividly the people who run the Government simply have not faced reality.
We are in a deadly epidemic, and national disaster will be the price of prejudice, piousness or self-delusion. Only the enlistment of all physical, moral, financial and medical assets, and some plain common sense, can begin to meet the danger. This means direct involvement of everybody concerned, most definitely including homosexuals. It is embarrassing to have to say so.
Will a candidate for the Presidency who does not tell us straight out the details of his plans for dealing with the AIDS reality be acceptable to American voters? I hope not.
But why wait? If the Reagan Administration is capable of thinking and acting and leading, it can show it now.
AIDS medical and social literature is full of separate good workable ideas. But the Government seems unwilling to find people who will pull them together and give them the power to act.
Two approaches are needed - simultaneously. One is to convince people in danger - particularly homosexuals, bisexuals and those who have had sexual intercourse with them - to take the tests that show if they have the virus that causes AIDS. If they do have it, they face the ethical decision of abstaining from sexual intercourse with the unafflicted.
At the same time, the Government must commit itself not to Presidential speeches but to real plans, action, burdens and sacrifices. Such as: 1. A central Federal AIDS office, with financial resources and clout, to pull together all the national and state efforts, to decide priorities and settle the inevitable conflicts for funds and attention. A director and a board composed of scientists and public figures who command the respect and attention of the nation. If the battle is to be fought, it has to be led, which Washington so far has failed to do against either drugs or AIDS. 2. Facing the burden of the huge costs of research and care, square on. Plague taxes. And much more money from business. Thousands of companies could follow the example of the Forbes magazine family, which contributed $1 million. 3. Tough legislation on discrimination against AIDS sufferers or virus carriers in jobs, housing, education. Protecting the afflicted is in the deep self-interest of a nation that needs their help to fight the plague. 4. Mandatory testing only where it makes sense. Trying to force tests on all the afflicted is impossible and self-defeating. But medical examination for contagious diseases is already demanded for immigrants, and AIDS testing should be added to the list. It should be a condition for enlisting in the armed forces. Government employees should volunteer for testing to create an atmosphere of society's strong approval. 5. Much more money allocated for drug addiction prevention and treatment. Drug addicts who use infected needles are becoming a steeply increasing danger. In New York, 36 percent of AIDS sufferers are addicts.
The black population is particularly threatened; white addicts usually have enough money for fresh needles. Already black babies fill most of the cribs in the AIDS pediatric wards, sentenced to death by the dirty needles of addict parents. 6. Drug addicts are usually too far gone to worry about the ethic of taking AIDS tests. But many of them wind up in jail, usually for robbery. They should be kept until drug clean. If they return to drug use after release, they should be sent back. Yes, more taxes for jails. 7. Prostitution suddenly is a priority public health matter. Prostitutes, both sexes, endanger themselves and others too often to be tolerated in a plague. Those who frequent prostitutes are also now dangerous. Both prostitutes and customers should be subject to arrest and the publicity that goes with it. 8. Reexamination of privacy regulations. I know of one doctor who discovered the AIDS virus in a male minor and was legally forbidden by the mother of the patient to inform him. The boy was sleeping with a steady girlfriend. The mother did not care. When does privacy become accessory to murder? Doctors and lawyers should take a new look at their standards, quickly. So should legislators.
Some of these points are unpleasant to read or write, particularly those that may touch on civil liberties. Better now and minimally, rather than late, when, with fear, disregard for liberties may grow even faster than the spread of the disease.
ON MY MIND
''This is a battle against disease, not against our fellow Americans.'' In his first speech devoted to AIDS, President Reagan made plain that his heart was in the right place. What's less evident is why he ignores the best advice of public health officials and recommends compulsory AIDS testing that has little relevance to the incidence of the disease.
Mr. Reagan would like to see the AIDS test applied to immigrants, Federal prisoners, patients at veterans' hospitals, people getting married and those attending sexual disease clinics. Apart from prison populations containing drug addicts, these are not the groups at highest risk for AIDS.
As for premarital testing, the Federal Centers for Disease Control finds that it ''is unlikely to be very effective,'' because most AIDS victims are drug addicts and homosexuals and the incidence of marriage among these groups is low. * * *
There is historical precedent and good reason for testing and excluding would-be immigrants with communicable diseases. And offering the AIDS test to those attending sexual disease clinics makes excellent sense if it is voluntary. Otherwise, all that would accomplish is to discourage people from attending the clinics.
That's why Mr. Reagan's emphasis on compulsory testing is counterproductive. Public health officials prefer voluntary testing lest they drive away the high-risk groups they most need to reach. To encourage wider voluntary testing, the Government needs to provide firmer guarantees of confidentiality and protection from discrimination. Mr. Reagan warned against discrimination but offered no specific ways to deter it.
Why test? The AIDS virus, he said, ''is surreptitiously spreading throughout our population.'' The question of spread needs to be addressed by wider AIDS testing, but a scientifically designed program would be preferable to the miscellaneous testing the President advocates. Besides, Mr. Reagan's emphasis on testing is misplaced. There are much more important things to do first.
One is to encourage changes of behavior, to prevent people from acquiring the virus and from passing it on. That calls for a widespread public education program, something the Federal Government is ideally situated to conduct. Yet Mr. Reagan seems willing to leave that task to the ad hoc efforts of states, schools and private businesses.
After education should come voluntary testing, accompanied by counseling, which is what makes a testing program effective in changing people's behavior regardless of test results. Washington could encourage wider voluntary testing in many ways, none of them cited by Mr. Reagan.
If a wide program of education and voluntary testing had been tried and failed, there might be grounds to consider the merits of compulsory testing, whether one calls it ''mandatory'' or ''routine.'' Mr. Reagan's Administration has been slow to respond to the AIDS epidemic, yet its first thought is to compel testing. That is inconsistent with what public health officials advise and with the compassion evident in Mr. Reagan's words.
After being offered a job at the New York City Planning Department last August, Tucker Ashworth told his prospective employer there was something he ought to know: he had AIDS. The offer, director of public affairs, stood; he accepted.
On the job, he disclosed his illness to his co-workers and eventually discussed it in public, urging people with AIDS to keep their jobs or find new ones, rather than retreat as outcasts. He worked at the Planning Department until April. Last weekend, he died.
Mr. Ashworth was lucky to find an employer and co-workers whose compassion equaled his courage. His example, and theirs, should inspire other AIDS sufferers to fight not just for life but for the right to live it fully.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
It's a true piece of fortune that Edward Koch is Mayor of New York and not, say, Secretary of State. Consider his suggestion that all foreign tourists to New York be barred if they test positive for the AIDS virus. Consider how ill considered this idea turns out to be.
New York City's economic health depends on the good will and custom of its overseas visitors -2.7 million of them last year, not even counting those from Mexico and Canada. Yet in the eyes of foreigners, they are far more likely to get AIDS from New Yorkers than to give it.
The Health Department estimates that 500,000 New Yorkers carry the AIDS virus. Mr. Koch could hardly object if the rest of the world were to demand that all New Yorkers be tested for AIDS before being allowed to visit. That would be no little inconvenience; it takes three weeks to get an appointment at city testing centers.
Blanket AIDS testing makes sense for people who want to immigrate; it makes much less sense for short-term visitors. By inviting others to ring the leper's bell, Mayor Koch's invidious policy would cast his own city into quarantine.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
Of course, says everyone from the President to Mayor Koch. It's obvious: Test people for AIDS. Testing, whether called mandatory or sugared with the term ''routine,'' has suddenly become the politicians' cure for this incurable disease. But testing is no more obvious than it is a cure. The underlying question, lost in all the clamor, is not whether to test but when, and why.
There are good reasons to test for AIDS. There are also some bad ones, and they cry out for open examination.
If there were an effective way to rid the body of the AIDS virus, widespread testing should begin immediately. Drugs for treatment of the overt disease are starting to become available, but no remedy for the virus exists. Then why test? Test immigrants and keep out those who test positive for the AIDS virus? Yes. The Public Health Service proposes doing just that and with good reason. Every country has a right, even a duty, to bar entrants with communicable diseases. Test prisoners and segregate those who test positive? Again yes, at least in principle, though wardens may find it more effective to isolate sexually violent prisoners. Test to follow the course of the AIDS virus? Once again, yes, but recognize that this calls for random sampling among the population, not required testing of unrepresentative groups. Test to halt the spread of the virus? Not on present evidence. There is an inevitable outcome to the logic of those who advocate dragnet testing of low-risk groups: quarantine. The idea is that society, facing a millennial plague, must be prepared to take unflinching measures. Once all carriers are identified, they will somehow have to be put in detention. That's a shocking idea but it's not foolish. Conceivably, it might one day be seen as brave. But it suffers from two drawbacks.
The testers fail to bring their unspoken agenda in the open. Detention camps across the country would be a shrieking departure from American tradition; all the more reason for the subject to be openly discussed - and compared with what public health professionals believe should be done instead.
Second, to screen everyone with the two AIDS tests, highly accurate as they are, would still result in thousands of ''false positives'' - people wrongly identified as having the virus - as well as false negatives. That means the 1.5 million Americans estimated to carry the virus, as well as those wrongly identified, would have to be confined, for life. If that were the only way to protect public health, maybe even that should be thinkable. But it isn't. Indeed, at present, all the testers' premises are false.
The whole population is not now at high risk. For reasons not yet understood, AIDS in this country apparently remains largely confined to high-risk groups, mainly homosexuals, drug addicts and their sexual partners. There is indeed a real threat that the virus will spread into the wider population. But to fight it, public health professionals want to target the high-risk groups, most especially addicts and their partners.
The experts want to show those who have the virus how not to pass it on, and those who don't how to avoid it. To be effective, this counseling needs to be offered along with testing.
Counseling means persuasion. There can be no such thing as ''mandatory counseling.'' That, like ''routine testing,'' has an Orwellian ring. Worse, it would be ineffective since the drug addicts whom public health officials most need to reach are already beyond the law. Education and targeted counseling are almost certainly a better way to curb the spread of AIDS.
The Administration, awaking to AIDS now after five years asleep, only on Friday announced the first serious steps to implement the strategy of its own public health experts - a massive education program, projects to reach drug addicts and random testing to monitor the epidemic's spread.
Instead of rushing toward detention camp thinking, Washington needs to calm down and look again. AIDS may well spread further, but it is not yet a Black Death, running like wildfire through the population generally. The smart place to battle it is among the high-risk groups. Save the homosexuals and drug addicts who are not yet infected by persuading them to change their behavior. Comfort and counsel the infected.
Using voluntary testing, public health officials have an approach that is effective and humane. Mandatory testing, a hasty step toward detention camps, would be neither.
AIDS tests for immigrants and Federal prisoners: that's the Reagan Administration's response to the epidemic so far. They are defensible steps but mainly symbolic. If the Administration is serious about fighting AIDS, it could do so far more effectively, starting now, with methadone.
The most sensible place to combat spread of the disease is among those most at risk, homosexuals and needle-drug abusers. Homosexuals, responsive to appeals to common sense, are practicing safer sex. For drug abusers, methadone could make an immediate difference.  * * *
Heroin addicts now account for more than 20 percent of AIDS cases nationally, 36 percent in New York City. The disease spreads as they share needles; they also transmit it to sexual partners and children. But how can self-destructive heroin addicts be reached?
Methadone, a drug that blocks heroin craving while allowing the addict to lead a normal life, has rescued tens of thousands. Half of New York City's 200,000 heroin addicts are believed to carry the AIDS virus. Methadone clinics now free 34,000 from their needles. Thousands more might be helped if methadone were more freely available.
It takes hard work - criminal or not - to finance a $100-a-day heroin habit. Many addicts seek ways out of the trap. Nearly 1,000 are now on the waiting list for methadone in New York City alone. Each rumor of openings generates a flood of new applicants. Why not throw open the gates?
Because of Federal regulation. The Food and Drug Administration requires one counselor for every 50 methadone patients. State rules may also require nurses and social workers. Existing space won't accommodate more staff, yet new space would generate fierce neighborhood resistance.
The staffing rules reflect official obeisance to a theoretical debate. Promoters of psychotherapies that seek to free the patient of all addiction say that methadone only trades one dependency for another. Unless personality factors that lead to addiction are addressed, they say, an addict on methadone remains vulnerable to cocaine or alcohol. The requirements for heavy staffing of clinics grow out of hopes that with therapy, at least some methadone patients will wind up drug free.
It's a reasonable point, or would be if the only issue were drug treatment. But AIDS adds a new dimension. Why does a society willing even to consider free needles for addicts remain so hesitant to provide more access to methadone?
A solid model for such access exists in Hong Kong. There, according to Dr. Robert Newman of Beth Israel Medical Center in New York, officials curbed a heroin epidemic by handing out methadone in a responsible way. Clinics were staffed by volunteers under doctors' supervision. Addicts were required only to submit to a cursory physical exam; no one waited more than half an hour. In five years, heroin abusers on methadone soared from 500 to 10,000. The number of addicts sentenced to prison plummeted 70 percent.
Federal staffing rules could be eased at the stroke of a regulator's pen, and states would surely follow suit. Dr. Newman has already persuaded Washington to waive the rules for an experiment involving 150 addicts. Ideally, he'd like to advertise free methadone on television and duplicate the Hong Kong experience in New York.
All America ought to support, and replicate, that approach. Testing of prisoners and immigrants only makes a statement. Methadone could make a difference.
Credit New york state and city officials for focusing on the most meaningful way to fight AIDS: helping heroin abusers kick their habits. Such addicts pass the disease among themselves by sharing needles, then pass it along to sexual partners and children.
Thousands more of the city's 200,000 heroin addicts would respond to treatment if it were available. Yet programs are heavily oversubscribed for lack of facilities.
The city will turn over several buildings to the state's Division of Substance Abuse Services. The agency will rehabilitate the space and set up 3,000 places for patients to be treated with methadone and other therapies, increasing current capacity by about 10 percent. Mayor Koch pledges to help quiet community opposition.
The expense and disruption wouldn't be necessary but for Federal rules tying methadone distribution to increases in counseling staffs. Methadone satisfies heroin craving while allowing the addict to function normally.
The drug itself, already administered to some 30,000 city addicts, can be dispensed quickly. It might be immediately given to more thousands were it not for the Federal staffing regulations.
The case for the Federal counseling requirement was shaky even before the urgent need to curb AIDS. Now the provision looks downright dangerous.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
Is the AIDS epidemic scything indiscriminately through the population like a medieval plague? Or is it still largely confined to high-risk groups like drug addicts, homosexuals and their sexual partners? The answer is critical because it determines which of two quite different strategies society pursues. The Reagan Administration, almost certainly, has picked the wrong answer and the wrong policy.
Administration officials liken the disease to the Black Death, and now the President himself declares that ''AIDS is surreptitiously spreading throughout our population.'' By contrast, here is the judgment of Harold Jaffe, chief AIDS epidemiologist at the Federal Centers for Disease Control:
''We really have not seen much evidence for the spread of the virus  [ outside ]  risk groups. For most people, the risk of AIDS is essentially zero . . . Why it isn't getting out beyond the immediate sexual partners of the risk group members, I don't know. Is the disease going to sweep into the heterosexual population, like Africa? I don't see it.''
The evidence for such a view, though not complete, comes from the AIDS virus's differing rate of spread among different groups. It spread explosively among homosexuals, because they often engaged in sexual practices now known to promote transmission, and among addicts because they inject infected blood directly into their bloodstream. But several lines of evidence continue to suggest that the rate of spread among heterosexuals in America is at present considerably slower.
* The virus can clearly be transmitted heterosexually. Some studies of the partners of risk group members show that about one out of five has become infected. But that coin has another side. Despite repeated, unprotected intercourse, four out of five of the partners have remained uninfected.
* If the virus were spreading fast heterosexually from the risk groups, among the first to be infected might be those with other sexually transmitted diseases. Three cities have done AIDS testing at venereal disease clinics among people who say they are not homosexuals, addicts or their partners. The results are striking. Among 205 attending a clinic in Queens, one has the virus. Among 1,000 who were screened in Denver, only one has tested positive. Among 300 in Seattle, none are positive.
* If AIDS is to spread widely, that would surely be evident in New York, where the virus has been endemic for a decade and now infects an estimated 500,000 New Yorkers in high-risk groups. Some 40 percent of people tested at an East Side AIDS testing site in Manhattan last month were women at low risk, from the population at large. Not one tested positive for the AIDS virus.
The AIDS virus may yet move into the population at large. Those outside the risk groups cannot in any way relax their guard. But these figures do suggest that the epidemic may still be largely confined, and that there is still the chance of keeping it so. That's the good news about AIDS.  The bad news is the continuing devastation of the communities at risk. Homosexuals have borne the nightmare with a courage and resourcefulness from which others may learn. Nothing can replace the wasted young lives, or the toll in professional and artistic worlds. Much of a talented community lives under this mortal shadow, desperately waiting for a treatment to be developed. May it come soon.
Bad news about AIDS continues to come from Central and East Africa. Some surveys show a high incidence of the virus among both men and women. Means to curb its spread, like education, screening the blood supply and sterilizing hospital needles, are often unknown or unaffordable. Western aid is increasing but America could do still more.
The lack of spread evident in the U.S. has clear policy implications: Focus every possible effort on containing the virus . . . Begin a serious program of methadone and other treatment for all drug addicts who seek it . . . Ignore any protests of stigmatization and persuade the leaders of black and Hispanic communities beset by drugs to warn of the dangers of AIDS. Those are the hard, politically thankless tasks the Administration has so far overlooked.
Instead, its spokesmen prefer to orate about Black Death, infecting the population at large with an epidemic of fear. The public, frightened, then demands firmer measures; the Administration responds with irrelevant exhortations to test applicants for marriage licenses. AIDS is not the Black Death. It could become so, particularly if the Administration continues to preach and posture - and ignore the main threat.
In the faraway land of Erewhon, where Samuel Butler derided the hypocrisy of Victorian England, crime was treated as a regrettable malady and health was promoted by vigorously punishing the sick. Imagine the satirist's despair if he could see the Reagan Administration's reaction to the AIDS epidemic.
The principal response has been to advocate testing people for the AIDS virus, without saying what is to be done with those who test positive. To read the testers' unspoken thoughts, listen to Senator Jesse Helms. He advocates widespread, compulsory AIDS testing, by withholding funds from states that refuse to test people who are getting married, and instituting a mandatory annual test for the military. His goal, he explains, ''is to protect the people who are innocent.'' Innocent? Of a disease? What would happen to the guilty, those who test positive for the AIDS virus? The Administration's spokesmen skirt the question. Not Senator Helms. He unblushingly carries their thinking to its conclusion. ''I think somewhere along the line we are going to have to quarantine, if we are really going to contain this disease. We did it back with syphilis, we did it with other diseases, and nobody even raised a question about it.''
One problem with ''quarantine'' is that infection with the AIDS virus, as far as is known, lasts for life, and no way of expelling the virus has yet been developed. Another is that an estimated 1.5 million Americans already carry the virus. That's three times the total number of the inmates of all state and Federal prisons. Mr. Helms had better start pushing for construction of internment camps.
There's an alternative, more effective and also cheaper: Teach people how to avoid giving or getting the virus. Mr. Helms evidently prefers the punitive approach, the idea that Government should forcibly screen its citizens' health, declare the infected to be guilty and lock them up for life. Samuel Butler wouldn't know where to begin parodying that.
Starting this month, television watchers in New York City and Buffalo can see yet another commercial featuring a handsome man, a pretty woman and music to go to bed by. But this commercial isn't selling detergent, jeans or diet soda. It's selling birth control, ''from saying 'no' to taking the pill.''
The commercial is the first step in a five-year public education effort to reduce an especially tragic kind of ignorance. Every year in New York 10,000 youngsters, some of them under 15, give birth; 64,000 babies are born to single mothers, and nearly 150,000 women and girls undergo abortions.
That tragic ignorance, and the need for such an effort to combat it, is hardly limited to New York. According to a recent study published by the Alan Guttmacher Institute, the proportion of girls under 15 who are sexually active is still rising. Since they're much less likely to use contraception than older kids, the implications are alarming. Better attention to birth control has lowered the pregnancy rates among sexually active teen-agers, but the overall teen-age pregnancy rate has increased as the number of sexually active children has increased. Abstinence, not contraception, is of course the surest way to cut the teen pregnancy rate. But certain realities must be faced: More than half the nation's adolescents report they've had intercourse by the age of 17.
Such early sexuality, and carelessness, exact a price. Of the 470,000 teen-agers who give birth every year (another 400,000 will have abortions and a substantial number will miscarry), most will drop out of school, earn less than half than do those who become mothers in their 20's, and go on welfare. In 1986, the country spent an estimated $18 billion on welfare, Medicaid and food stamps for families begun when the mother was a teen-ager.
''Birth control,'' a voice-over on the New York commercial says, ''you're too smart not to use it.'' Commercials like this one, shown all over the country, can help make teen-agers smarter.
The grand jury, an institution some would abolish, has again proved itself a powerful instrument of social reform.
A Manhattan grand jury that recently investigated the death of an 18-year-old woman at a Manhattan hospital did not find enough evidence to return an indictment. But it did find that serious problems in the way the hospital delivered health care may well have contributed to the young woman's death.
This, in turn, led the grand jury to recommend drastic changes in the way interns and residents are trained and supervised, including a limitation on the exhausting 36-hour shifts they are required to work, as well as new standards regulating the use of physical restraints and the prescribing of drugs.
At the recommendation of a panel of prominent physicians, the grand jury's ideas then became a central part of sweeping changes in hospital regulations proposed by the New York State health commissioner.
This grand jury was hardly an aberration. Grand juries have traditionally aroused the public to rally around significant causes.
For centuries, the grand jury in England was authorized to issue ''presentments'' - reports of nonindictable or objectionable misconduct. And in colonial America, grand juries also undertook the task of protecting citizens from the tyranny of royal rulers.
The most prominent example was the case of Peter Zenger, a New York newspaper publisher who printed a personal attack on the English Governor. In 1734, the Governor twice sought to have Zenger indicted by a grand jury for criminal libel and twice Zenger's fellow citizens refused to charge him. It was only through executive fiat that Zenger was brought to trial. Ultimately, his fellow citizens acquitted him.
In the very first draft of the Bill of Rights, James Madison included a provision requiring criminal cases to be prosecuted by grand jury and authorized the grand jury to return ''presentments'' concerning social problems that went beyond the question of simple criminal liability. This provision was incorporated into the Fifth Amendment of the Federal Constitution.
New York State's Constitution codified the right of citizens to be charged with committing a felony only by indictment by a grand jury of their peers. Under the state's Constitution, grand juries also continued the practice of investigating public corruption. In 1872, a grand jury probing New York City corruption helped end the reign of Boss William Marcy Tweed and his associates. In the 1930's, grand juries did much to assure the prosecution of racketeering and political corruption.
In 1938, the Constitution was amended so that a grand jury's power to inquire into the willful misconduct of public officers ''shall never be suspended or impaired by law.'' Again in the 1950's, grand juries in New York investigating crimes and official misconduct routinely issued reports dealing with such topics as organized crime's involvement with the waterfront, gambling and police corruption.
In 1961, however, New York State's highest court sought to end the practice of releasing grand jury reports that called attention to official misconduct and recommended reforms - even though that practice had long been recognized as one of the grand jury's most valuable functions.
There was an immediate public outcry, and in time the Legislature restored the grand jury's power to make ''presentments'' and even broadened the scope of the reports. The Legislature also included safeguards to protect from unfounded charges those persons whose conduct was described in the reports.
In this age of widespread public and private corruption and the mistrust it engenders, grand juries continue to be a vital means not only for leveling criminal accusations but also for identifying and remedying social problems. A grand jury system that can trigger sweeping changes in the system of medical care that affects millions of people must itself be a healthy one.
Justice is supposed to be blind but blind ignorance is what some judges and court officers display toward defendants with AIDS, even those merely suspected of having the disease.
A Westchester judge, Nicholas Colabella, recently moved a drug defendant's sentencing out of his small courtroom to an outdoor parking lot because the offender was suspected of having AIDS. The judge ordered the change in the apparent belief that ''lots of space and sunshine'' would reduce risk to court personnel.
Likewise, a Fresno, Calif., judge, John Gallagher, barred the public from the courtroom when he arraigned a prostitute known to have AIDS-related complex. The bailiffs all wore rubber gloves and the defendant was required to wear a surgical mask.
Such precautions were absurd. All medical evidence shows that the virus is not casually transmitted but requires mingling of blood or fluids, as in sexual intercourse with a carrier or sharing of hypodermic needles. Judge Colabella tried to defend his antics by asserting that an AIDS-infected defendant might go berserk and bite someone. Whether or not bites can spread the disease, that could happen outdoors as well as in.
Judges are supposed to do justice, not parody it with mindless fear.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
Saatchi & Saatchi DFS Compton, the advertising agency, recently unveiled three television commercials it made for the New York City Health Department promoting use of condoms to limit AIDS. One shows a woman handing a package of condoms to her daughter with the words ''If you're doing anything, you use one of these. You understand? 'Cause my baby is not getting AIDS.'' The second shows a woman putting on makeup, then dropping a condom in her purse. In the third a couple is kissing. The female hands the male a condom. He hands it back. An announcer says, ''And if he says no, so can you.''
The frankness of the ads set off a storm. So did their unabashed appeal to women. Some women expressed outrage that they, who have always borne the burden for contraception, are now expected to bear the burden for AIDS prevention as well. Asked why, Charles Abrams, a Saatchi executive, replied, ''They're accustomed to taking charge of their lives.''
That's right, they are, and for a very good reason. Although insemination takes two sexes, only one sex gets pregnant, bears children and undergoes abortions. And women are at risk of getting AIDS from men who turn out to be bisexual or intravenous drug users infected with the virus. Female-to-male transmission is much rarer.
Women are accustomed to talking to their doctors about contraception, but talking to a partner about condom use is more complicated. A woman writing in Vogue surely finds it so. ''Getting a man to wear a condom isn't as simple as saying 'You look better in a hat,' '' she notes, and promptly goes condom-shopping. Her efforts to get partners to accept her offerings - she is always, it seems, buying the wrong brand - are recounted with increasing hilarity. Why is this woman laughing?  And why don't men get their own condoms? They are not about to as long as women do it for them. (Women buy as many as 70 percent of the condoms sold in this country.) And commercials like those prepared by Saatchi only reinforce men's reluctance to take responsibility for their sex lives.
Although millions of New Yorkers are familiar with the Health Department commercials, they won't be widely aired. Only one television station, owned by the city, has agreed to carry all three. Now Mayor Koch has ordered another, less controversial campaign directed at adolescents. This one will stress abstinence and probably won't upset anyone.
Abstinence should be encouraged, but so should use of condoms - even at risk of offending those politicians and religious leaders who objected to the Saatchi commercials. There's a way, though, to avoid gratuitously offending women. Put the emphasis for prevention of AIDS where it belongs. On men, too.
The Reagan Administration's naivete in sending a limited ''catastrophic illness'' Medicare bill to Congress is now being graphically demonstrated. Lots of Congressmen want to turn it into a traditional legislative ''Christmas tree'' with goodies available for everybody. Hence the proposals to add drug benefits, increased home care and nursing home coverage, etc. The orgy may yet give us a national health insurance bill that would really bankrupt this country. The multi-trillion dollar national debt has been forgotten in the Congressional spoils rush.
This shameless drive to buy the votes of our senior citizens by offering them more Medicare benefits will not, however, be a total waste if it forces our society to take a hard look at Medicare, its vast expenditures and its lack of any logic.
The basic fact is that for most beneficiaries Medicare is simply welfare for the wealthy. By now we know that senior citizens, and I am one, are on the average wealthier than Americans under 65. What sense does it make for the United States Government to pay the medical bills of people like Armand Hammer, David Rockefeller, George Burns and Richard M. Nixon? They and millions of other senior citizens can afford their own medical insurance policies. They don't need to be subsidized by young people who, to a much larger extent, are poor blacks and Hispanics.
When Medicare became law in the 1960's, Congress assumed that virtually all senior citizens were poor and needed help. It wasn't true then, and it is much less true today. Hence in Medicare we have a Government subsidy program that helps millions who need no subsidy.
The solution is simple. Abolish Medicare and broaden Medicaid - a program specifically designed to help the needy - so that it really covers all Americans who are too poor to pay for medical care. The current estimates that there are 35 million Americans without any health insurance are probably excessive, but even if we discount this exaggerated figure, it is plain that millions of Americans who need Government help for medical care are not getting it. That's where some of the billions being wasted on Medicare for the affluent should be going.
The cynics will say that it's impos-sible to abolish Medicare, however much that move may be justified. Senior citizens who live in Scarsdale, Greenwich, Great Neck, Chicago's Gold Coast, Hollywood, Newport Beach and Marin County are also voters, we'll be told, and they would wreak vengeance on Congressmen who took Medicare away.
But Medicare isn't as attractive as it used to be. Affluent and intelligent senior citizens know about the diagnosis related groups, Medicare's hospital payment system that encourages hospitals to evict senior citizens as soon as it can be done without precipitating a major malpractice suit. And we also know about Medicare's chiseling on doctor fees, which is rapidly making Medicare patients almost as financially unattractive as Medicaid clients already are.
When somebody over 65 gets heart disease or cancer or stroke, he or she wants the best doctor and the best hospital, not the ones who are charging the Government the least money. But it is those second-raters we will increasingly get if Medicare payment trends continue. Already it's clear that Medicare officials want to herd all of us senior citizens into Health Maintenance Organizations, where we'll get the kind of impersonal and cost-comes-first treatment that a ranch veterinarian gives the cows on a 10,000-acre spread.
Instead of making Medicare more expensive with goodies most of its beneficiaries don't need, abolish Medicare. That will let the majority of senior citizens who can, buy their own insurance policies and negotiate the best bargains possible with the doctors and hospitals they want. The billions of dollars saved can go to help poor Americans regardless of age, including those several million really senior citizens (over 75 or 80) who need expensive nursing home care they can't afford and Medicaid won't buy for them. Even then, there ought to be enough money left over to lift several billion dollars from the national debt - hence from the shoulders of our children and grandchildren.
Everyone will help pay for the treatment of AIDS patients. The question is whether society will do so with higher health insurance premiums or, via Medicaid, with higher taxes. At least for now, the better way is insurance.
This issue differs markedly from AIDS and life insurance. Life insurers cannot regularly adjust premiums, and have been abused by applicants who take out large policies after learning they carry the virus. Governor Dukakis last week allowed life insurers in Massachusetts to test for the AIDS virus.
Health insurers deserve less sympathy when they insist on the right to test applicants and to deny coverage to those infected with the AIDS virus. AIDS patients without health insurance must first exhaust their savings, so that as paupers they can qualify for Medicaid, the Government's medical program for the poor. The more humane course is to bar health insurers from testing for the AIDS virus.
Some health insurers warn that the projected cost of the AIDS epidemic will destroy their business. They cite a basic principle of insurance: People at equal risk should pay equal premiums. Carriers of the AIDS virus, being at higher risk, should not be subsidized by others. Bank clerks and trapeze artists do not belong in the same pool.
A second principle, say insurers, is that insurance cannot be bought against an event that has already become likely. A house in the path of a forest fire can't be insured; neither should a person already infected with the AIDS virus.
These are compelling arguments, but only in theory. In practice, most health insurance customers are not screened or tested, even though increasingly refined modern medical tests could identify many different risks. Insurers don't bother to make these distinctions because most people are insured, through employers, in groups. The group premium can be adjusted each year depending on the previous year's health costs.
Insurers concede that they are not worried about group health insurance so much as the 10 percent of applicants who seek individual insurance. Those, they say, may form a pool too small to spread the cost of AIDS. Thus the issue descends from principles to numbers.
But the numbers, so far, are not persuasive. Compared with the annual inflation of medical costs, the cost of AIDS remains small. Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, New York's nonprofit insurer, offers individual health insurance, without testing, to all who apply. This year it expects to pay $80 million for AIDS, less than 1 percent of its total payout of $10 billion. Private insurers who complain about AIDS, says a Blue Cross spokesman, are crying wolf.
But the wolf is real, say the private insurers, or soon will be, with the total health insurance costs of AIDS expected to reach $10 billion a year by 1991. Maybe, but if that's more than they can handle, their actuaries could file requests for rate increases with state insurance departments. So far none have. New York's department has now rightly joined California in denying use of the AIDS antibody test as a screen for health insurance.
The cost of AIDS could become less manageable for insurers if, for example, many employers should start to self-insure or somehow exclude AIDS virus carriers. But the insurers' fear of imminent ruin is overstated. In some states they are already forbidden to test for diseases that affect only certain groups, like sickle-cell anemia and Tay-Sachs. Insurance is about sharing risk. The cost of AIDS is not so heavy that its victims need be made scapegoats and cast out to bear their burden alone.
Calcutta, U.S.A. - it's an apt name for New York City in the summertime, as thousands of homeless and deranged people camp out on the streets. That sordid spectacle is made worse by the way the city has chosen to deal with the homeless.
The city concentrates its attention on mass temporary shelters. Yet these huge facilities intimidate the most vulnerable of the homeless, the mentally ill. Only extreme cold drives them to the shelters. In summer, they take over the streets.
Most New Yorkers are all too familiar with the problem: On the corner of Canal Street and Broadway, a ragged man with a wild stare methodically tosses coins into a storm drain. In an entryway at the Port Authority Bus Terminal, exhausted forms lie in disarray among their belongings. On Restaurant Row in the theater district, well-dressed couples encounter panhandlers pleading starvation. Yet city and state officials have only lately seen the need for more than temporary answers.
Why must New Yorkers confront demented people wandering the streets? Because tens of thousands of mental patients were turned out of upstate hospitals a decade ago, and new admissions were restricted. The idea was to rely on more humane community-based treatment - but it never developed on an adequate level. The city might then have found ways to expand the network of Single Room Occupancy hotels in which many of the mentally ill were housed. Instead it stood by as a real estate boom forced many S.R.O.'s to close down.
The eventual response, under pressure from the courts, was a system of emergency shelters where people could find a bed and a meal. Too often they also found chaos, violence and other horrors. As a result, many of the mentally ill shrink from the shelters in fear. Only the cold brings them in. That fact appears to affect official attitudes. In winter, as the freezing homeless crowd in, city officials express alarm. In the summer they relax, leaving the problem on the ordinary citizen's doorstep - and stairway, sidewalk and terminal.
The Koch administration has long shrugged off further responsibility, arguing that the homeless can't be coerced to come to shelters. It has also worried that more inviting accommodations would provoke a demand that would be impossible to supply. But there is neither humanity nor enlightenment in upholding the ''right'' of the demented to deteriorate in the street. Neither is there wisdom in trying to conserve city resources in a way that leaves wretched people sleeping on sidewalks, talking to fire hydrants and defacing the civility of city life.
Social work and mental health professionals know how to address the problem legally and effectively: (1) Set up new single room occupancy facilities, along with storefront ''drop-in'' centers that offer meals, showers and a change of clothes without a hassle; (2) staff them with social workers and psychiatrists committed to aggressive outreach; (3) when the mentally ill won't come in for services, take the services out to the streets.
To carry out such policy adequately would be expensive. But the city's temporary shelter policy is no bargain. In 1988, it will cost New York City and state taxpayers $150 million. In fact, city budget officials now say that the S.R.O./drop-in center approach might not cost the city very much more because the homeless, once enrolled, could qualify for Federal benefits.
That realization has finally turned some heads in City Hall and in Albany. This spring New York City got legislative approval for 2,600 new S.R.O. beds. A walk around the city these steaming summer days, however, makes clear that the need could be 10 times as great. It's still Calcutta.
Mesclun is a collection of very young greens, leaves and flower petals that, dressed with a light vinaigrette, makes for this summer's trendiest salad. It is also a word that makes for some confusion. Witness the case of the woman who bought a quarter of a pound the other day.
''Come over for dinner tonight,'' she said to her daughter. ''I've got some mesclun.'' The daughter was stunned. ''Want to smell something wonderful?'' she asked a colleague. ''Just sniff this mesclun.'' The colleague was staggered. They thought she was offering them mescaline, the psychedelic derived from a Mexican cactus.
Once they discovered the woman was talking arugula, wild spinach and nasturtium petals, both seemed happy she hadn't moved out of her usual place in the slow lane. But not as happy as she, that they would think her capable of so startling a shift.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
The catastrophic Medicare health insurance bill passed yesterday by the House goes well beyond the version offered last fall by the Reagan Administration - but not so far beyond that it merits the President's threatened veto.
There is broad agreement on the goal: to dispel for elderly Americans the specter of financial ruin because of illness. Only one in 35 Medicare participants actually suffers such devastating illness each year, but all fear it. Many seek protection in so-called Medigap policies, which can cost $1,000 or more annually.
The Administration proposal, unveiled last fall by Secretary of Health and Human Services Dr. Otis Bowen, called for an increase of $4.92 in the $17.90 monthly Medicare premium. In return, the limited protection now afforded by Medicare would become unlimited after deductibles: no one would pay more than $2,000 out of pocket each year for hospital care.
The House expanded on this basic design, increasing benefits for outpatient and physician care, and skilled nursing and hospice care, among other things. Two changes raised the Administration's hackles. Instead of a uniform premium increase, House Democrats created a graduated system of premiums pegged to income. If enacted it would be the first means-tested premium for Medicare or any aspect of the Social Security system. From the beginning, these have been thought of as social insurance programs, not welfare, and thus inappropriate for means tests. But $200 billion deficits have made such thinking anachronistic.
More than graduated premiums, the Administration resists the addition of a benefit for outpatient prescription drugs. Under the House bill, Medicare would pay 80 percent of drug costs after a $500 annual deductible.
The Administration's concern here is justified. Estimates of the first-year cost remain fuzzy, ranging from $1 billion to more than $7 billion. Uncertainty on so basic a point reasonably inspires worries that the provision could quickly lead to either prohibitive premiums or a demand for subsidies from the general treasury. The issue deserves more study, as the Senate Finance Committee recognized when it excluded prescription drug aid from its version of the bill. This can be reconsidered when the bill goes to a House-Senate conference.
Still, passage of the House bill moves the nation a step closer to a needed social reform. Let the Senate quickly follow through, and let the White House remember how far it has brought this issue before talking again of a veto.
After a steady trickle of fraud in academic science, there now comes a serious case of misrepresented data. Charles J. Glueck, of the University of Cincinnati, reported that children can effectively be fed a low-cholesterol diet to prevent heart disease. But the prescription may be false: a university committee found that the study was based on data that ''barely existed.'' This month Dr. Glueck resigned.
Why would any scientist, committed to learning the truth about nature, even contemplate publishing unsupported results? Because the more articles a researcher publishes, the better his chances for Federal grants, university jobs and academic honors. Perhaps that's why two of Dr. Glueck's co-authors, though aware of problems with the results, left their names on the study.
But why take the risk of publishing half-truths when scientific data are rigorously checked before and after publication? Because the checks are really not so rigorous. Few are caught by the standard checking mechanisms of science, which are prepublication review and attempts by others to replicate published results. Reviewers of a manuscript can rarely tell if data are real or imaginary. Failure to replicate a scientist's claim is seldom grounds to accuse him of cheating since there are many reasons for an experiment to turn out differently on repetition. Most known fabrications come to light, as in Dr. Glueck's case, because of insiders who blow the whistle.
The credibility of science depends on the assumption that claims are rigorously checked. Why, then, are scientific leaders content to let their quality control system rest so heavily on the freelance efforts of whistle blowers? Gresham's law, that bad money drives out good, may offer an insight. Published articles being the coin of credit, why make it unduly hard to mint them? Everything is arranged to make scientific publication easy. Journals proliferate so that few articles, however bad, cannot get published somewhere.
Scientists pay ''page charges'' to be published, as for vanity presses, but neither the page charges nor the subsidies to the libraries that buy the journals exert restraint on publication because both come from public funds. Senior researchers, assigned control over Federal grants, find it easy to multiply their authorships by adding their name to the work of the juniors. Dr. Glueck, a heavy publisher, is the author of 379 scientific papers. With many scientists interested in the sheer quantity of publications, who is going to spoil their colleagues' game and fuss about quality?
Fraudulent or misrepresented articles signal the debasement of the general coinage. Police methods to root out fraud would retard science and be wholly inappropriate. Steps to improve the general quality of scientific literature - like reducing pressures to publish and checking that reported data indeed exist - would speed recognition of true advances and could enhance the efficiency of public spending on science.
A man who rarely rides the subway took a train from Times Square to Brooklyn the other day and emerged doubly impressed:
Beyond the unexpected cleanliness of the system - his train's walls and windows were entirely free of graffiti - he had been subjected to a heavy dose of advertising about sex-related problems.
''Pregnant? We can help,'' said an ad for a women's health service. It offered the reader ''Obstetrics - Gynecology - Abortion.''
''Don't go out without your rubbers,'' advised another sign, a caution to safer sex. It depicted a condom among the more traditional contents of a woman's purse.
''AIDS is a human disease. It requires a humane response,'' said a Unitarian Church-sponsored ad, which urged a call to the New York City Health Department's AIDS Hotline.
And another placard, sponsored by Planned Parenthood, offered birth control advice in Spanish.
Only yesterday sex in advertising was supposed to turn people on. Now, it seems from the subway car signs, the idea is to turn people off, or at least turn them in another direction.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
''Cuando Estemos Juntos'' (''When We're Together'') is sexy, suggestive and sung by a boy and a girl who look as if they have a mattress in mind. But its message is abstinence (''I don't want us to regret / Having lived an encounter. / You'll see I'm right / When I say no'') and it has been heard all over Mexico. Not only did ''Cuando Estemos Juntos'' sell 500,000 copies last year, but it provoked a remarkable increase in phone calls and visits to family planning centers - just as its producers hoped.
The song and its follow-up, ''Detente'' (''Wait''), are the result of a $300,000 grant from the United States Agency for International Development to help curb teen-age pregnancies throughout Latin America.
Latin America, however, is hardly alone in having a teen-age pregnancy problem. That's why both songs are being released this month in the United States aimed specifically at the nation's Spanish-speaking community. The couple who sing the songs, Tatiana Palacios and Johnny Lozada, are donating their profits to Johns Hopkins University, which helped develop the project.
''. . . A love that's rushed / Brings children we can't afford / Children / Without love, without anything'' is the conclusion of ''Detente.'' That's good advice for adolescents north and south of the border.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
Fear of AIDS has produced its most painful symptom yet: doctors and dentists who refuse to treat patients they believe to be infected with the AIDS virus.
''I've got to be selfish,'' says the chief heart surgeon at a Milwaukee hospital. ''I've got to think about myself; I've got to think about my family. That responsibility is greater than to the patient.'' Any physician who holds that belief needs a new profession. The tradition of medicine rests foursquare on the opposite proposition, that a physician's first duty is to his patients. And the duty can be carried out without irrational fear, since the evidence shows little chance of contracting AIDS in caring for those infected.
Those who openly refuse to treat people with the AIDS virus stand in sad contrast to the physicians and nurses who unhesitatingly cared for the first AIDS sufferers. These health care workers, in the years before the cause of AIDS was discovered, had abundant reason to fear contracting the strange disease and infecting their families in turn.
Because of their courage, it is now well established that health care workers run very small risk of contracting the AIDS virus from their patients, and that the risk is essentially nil if they follow the precautions advised by the Centers for Disease Control. Even doctors or nurses who accidentally absorb AIDS-tainted blood are unlikely to be infected. Of 886 health care workers exposed through cuts or needle sticks, only three have tested positive for the virus. All three had breaks in the skin through which the virus may have passed, and one was exposed to the patient's blood for 20 minutes.
How paradoxical, then, that armed with this wealth of reassuring evidence, a number of doctors are now behaving as if they are at grave personal risk. There is every reason for health care workers to be careful, and last week the Centers for Disease Control convened a meeting to review new guidelines on how they can best protect themselves. But concern is different from an irrational degree of fear.
So far only a handful of doctors have openly refused to treat patients. The American Nurses Association states that nurses ''are not backing away from caring for AIDS patients. They have from the beginning and they will to the end.''
But among dentists in Chicago, so few are willing to accept AIDS patients that the Chicago Dental Society is considering setting up a special clinic. And a quarter of 258 doctors in training at New York hospitals said recently they thought it was ethical to refuse to treat people infected with the AIDS virus. When even medically trained people ignore medical evidence and succumb to panic, they set a miserable example for others in society who must deal with the disease and its carriers.
Six percent of those who have contracted AIDS through sexual contact or sharing contaminated needles are in fact health care workers. Patients could just as well refuse to be treated by any hospital staff who had not been tested for the AIDS virus.
Instead of public and physician each irrationally demanding the other be tested or rejected, both would do better to reaffirm the terms of the old deal, that doctors are honored for selflessly caring for the sick.
In July last year Michael Zasloff, a geneticist at the National Institutes of Health, watched an African clawed frog recover from a surgical incision. He had noticed the frog's sturdy healing process many times before, but this time he wondered why it healed so easily in tank water murky with bacteria. That was the first step toward a discovery that may prove of great importance to medicine.
The key, as is often the case in scientific discovery, was found by a researcher not so intent on his primary goal that he couldn't notice and pursue a quite different line of inquiry. Dr. Zasloff examined another healing wound for the white cells that fight off infection, and found none. That meant the frog's immune system was not involved, so he guessed that some potent chemical in the skin itself might be defending the wound from invading germs. Grinding up frog skin and screening its chemicals, he found two such substances, which he named ''magainins,'' or shields in Hebrew.
The magainins are a new family of antibiotics with an unusually wide range. They kill bacteria, funguses, the yeast that often infects AIDS patients, and protozoans like those that cause malaria. They are not as toxic as many other powerful antibiotics.
As in Alexander Fleming's discovery of penicillin, chance observation was only the beginning of the magainin story. Many others before Fleming had noted that molds, even Penicillium molds, inhibit the growth of bacteria. The plaque of dead bacteria he chanced on in 1928 had been seeded by a rare strain of Penicillium that produced copious quantities of antibiotic. Hence Fleming had no trouble showing that extracts killed bacteria in the test tube. But he failed to discover that penicillin would do the same when injected into the body.
That step was taken by Howard Florey and Ernest Chain 12 years later, just in time to save thousands of lives during World War II. Like many scientific discoveries, the discovery of penicillin was a complex series of events.
So too was the finding of the magainins, though Dr. Zasloff, aided by the immense power of modern biological techniques, performed all the steps in the discovery himself, in a single year.
Because of overuse, the present family of antibiotics is fading as bacteria acquire resistance. Only this week a new strain of gonorrhea has turned up that is resistant to three major antibiotics. The clinical value of the magainins has yet to be assessed. But even if only part of their laboratory promise is fulfilled, Dr. Zasloff will have produced a fine successor to penicillin.
Scenes from a stroll along the Fifth Avenue side of Central Park:
Near 87th, stretched out on a bench, a ragged black man lay snoring. A thin white man, also ragged, watched him from behind a tree - with who-knows-what in mind. Then he realized that he was being watched and bolted down the street.
Near 85th, a short man in a plaid shirt shouted, ''You're the problem; you're the enemy.'' Then, as he drew closer, he said: ''Don't mind me. I'm crazy.''
Near 84th, a woman wearing a coat despite the heat held out a paper cup and croaked, ''Quarter for lunch? Quarter for lunch?'' Near 79th, sprawled awkwardly on the pavement against the park wall sat a frail older woman in a white linen suit with a Saks shopping bag. Had she fallen and hurt herself? The instinct was to help. But something seemed wrong. The suit, though obviously expensive, was quite soiled. The bag was worn. And her eyes stared vacantly as she picked and picked at a thread on her jacket.
Official policy is to provide such people community-based treatment rather than keep them in state mental hospitals. Yet there is all too little assistance actually available, leaving such unfortunate citizens only a choice of mass temporary shelters and the street. Some treatment. Some community.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
In reacting to the warning signal from deep inside that he received last week, New York's Mayor, Edward Koch, displayed a jauntiness of spirit that evokes admiration. It also evokes a word of advice.
Leaving the hospital after a minor stroke (his doctors deserve credit, after confirming the diagnosis, for not hiding it under the euphemism ''vascular accident''), the Mayor repeated the doctors' finding that he has a 28-year-old brain inside his 62-year-old body. He proposes to reduce the discrepancy by slimming down the body. That's a splendid goal but the Mayor could do more to close the gap between mind and matter.
To be thoroughly comfortable inside a body aged 62, a brain has to be at least 40. Who needs a 28-year-old Mayor? Not only does the city benefit from Mr. Koch's years of experience in national and local politics. It also benefits from the qualities of judgment those years have burnished. In the Mayor's case, the greatest threat to that good sense - and surely a contributing cause of strokes - is his tendency to work too hard, like a 28-year-old.
A 40-year-old brain knows enough to let itself get tired and to seek occasional escape to quiet pastimes and comfortable companions. It recognizes that no job, however stimulating, can be carried on the top of one's head 24 hours of every day without hurting the neck.
A 40-year-old brain knows that not every bit of foolishness, stupidity or tastelessness deserves a comment or a conference. On that point, give Mr. Koch credit for studiously ignoring the pickets who dishonored the cause of the homeless by demonstrating against him as he emerged from the hospital. Some insults, the 40-year-old brain knows, are not worth taking the time to answer. All other New Yorkers will wish him a speedy convalescence and a happy match between 40 years at the temple and 36 inches at the waist.
Insurance companies have been beating the drum about the costs of AIDS, warning that they face bankruptcy if not allowed to test and exclude people carrying the AIDS virus. Though life insurance companies may have a case, health insurers at present do not. Governor Cuomo and James Corcoran, New York State's Superintendent of Insurance, courageously faced down the clamor and last week issued a regulation to bar health insurers from testing applicants for AIDS.
Does that unfairly burden policyholders who are not at risk from AIDS? The facts suggest not.
The extra costs of AIDS are still small compared with the general inflation in medical costs. Most people are insured through group plans, for which the insurer can adjust the premium depending on last year's medical costs. Besides, insurance is about sharing risk. If the public does not bear the health costs of AIDS through insurance, it will pay in the form of higher taxes for public hospital treatment. The only difference is that in the latter case, AIDS victims have to spend themselves into penury to qualify for Medicaid.
New York has chosen the harder but more humane course.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
New York recently became the first state to end the need for two deadly deceits in hospitals. One is the ''slow code,'' meaning medical resuscitation teams should move very slowly. The other is the ''show code,'' meaning resuscitation efforts should be faked, for the family's sake.
Governor Cuomo has signed a welcome law requiring hospitals and nursing homes to withhold emergency cardiopulmonary resuscitation from patients who refuse it. The law also grants civil and criminal immunity to health professionals who carry out a lawful ''do-not-resuscitate'' order in good faith or who, unaware of such an order, resuscitate someone who didn't want to be.
Under the measure, patients are permitted to decide, in advance, to forgo emergency resuscitation even if they're not terminally ill. They're also permitted to appoint someone to decide on their behalf if they become incompetent. Failing such directives, the law affirms the presumption that all patients consent to be resuscitated. But if a patient is both incompetent and terminally ill, hospital or nursing home officials can choose a surrogate from family or close friends. If no surrogate is available, the law permits a do-not-resuscitate order from a court or from two physicians who determine that resuscitation is medically futile.
The orders must be reviewed case by case every three days in hospitals and every 60 days in nursing homes. The law also requires that a patient's competence be established by physicians and that a procedure be established for mediating any conflicts between a patient's desire not to be resuscitated and a physician's personal convictions or professional ethics.
While inevitably cumbersome, the new law does much to dispel the confusions and accidental cruelties that accompany new medical technologies. Above all, it recognizes a patient's right to make choices about death as well as life.
New York has much to boast about - but not the health of its babies. The state has the 14th highest infant mortality rate in the country and ranks 38th in the percentage of low-birthweight infants.
These two ignominious statistics reflect a third, equally ignominious: the percentage of women who, uncovered by any public or private health insurance, receive late prenatal care or no prenatal care at all. That percentage figure has been increasing since 1980 and now stands at twice the national average.
Welcome, therefore, Governor Cuomo's signature on the Prenatal Care Act of 1987, which amends the public health and insurance laws to establish a permanent prenatal care and nutrition program for the thousands of low-income New Yorkers who are ineligible for Medicaid but unable to afford private insurance. It also expands covered services to include physician costs for labor and delivery along with prenatal care.
The cost of maintaining a low-birthweight baby in a pediatric intensive care unit is about $1,000 a day - and that is just the beginning. Since such infants are likely to be physically or mentally handicapped, they will burden public budgets for most of their lives.
In allocating $24.6 million to give poor babies a better start in life, New York has bought itself a bargain.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
Six friends gathered recently in a house on the lip of the Atlantic. Waves slapped the shore; dune grass swayed in the breeze; a white-tailed doe and her two fawns nibbled the beach plums. Rarely had nature seemed more benign. But the people inside were less than enchanted. Five of the six were trying to outdo one another in describing symptoms of Lyme disease.
Lyme disease? This debilitating illness, named for the Connecticut town where it was first discovered, is carried by deer ticks and once seemed rare. But in the last decade it has afflicted more than 5,000 people nationwide. Efforts have failed to eradicate the ticks creeping over Connecticut, northern Westchester and the Long Island shore.
Lyme disease ambushes residents and vacationers in meadows, woodlands and on the dunes. Indeed, of the six people in the room only Lucy was not a victim.
To fight the disease, Billy is taking amoxicillin as well as a kidney blocker to forestall excretion of the antibiotic. Though jaundiced, he now seems on the mend. Bert and Herb were lucky. Their Lyme disease displayed classic early symptoms: a perfect bull's eye rash, a blood-red circle with an aureole slightly less sinister; fever, chills, fatigue and respiratory impairment. They had been treated at the onset and had recovered relatively quickly.
Elizabeth wasn't so fortunate. A year ago, she had a fever and rash but decided it wasn't Lyme disease. She likes diagnosing herself, and everyone else. Three months later her left foot and right leg functioned only fitfully. She thought an abscess had developed in her jaw yet the dentist declared her teeth to be sound. A specialist in Lyme disease advised her to check into a hospital for 10 days of high-impact, round-the-clock intravenous penicillin - a treatment similar to that for spinal meningitis. She is 85 percent recovered but arthritic pain may persist for a couple of years.
What causes Lyme disease? Borrelia burgdorferi is a nasty little spirochete carried by deer ticks. The tick itself, no larger than a pinhead, feeds on deer (which are immune) and transmits the bacteria to dogs, horses and humans who have no immunity.
''I'm going to get my gun and shoot that doe and her brats,'' growled Billy.
''Calm down, Billy; you can't shoot all the deer, let alone the white-footed field mice and voles,'' someone else counseled. All these furred creatures carry Borrelia burgdorferi.
But where the Borrelia burgdorferi came from no one is sure. Thus Deborah was a pioneer. She caught Lyme fever eight years ago, only four years after the disease was first reported. Her doctors were baffled. They tried treatment after treatment. She developed paralysis of facial muscles that was diagnosed as Bell's palsy and was finally hospitalized with myocarditis. Once the disease was diagnosed, she was treated successfully. She says she is now fit as a fiddle.
Like AIDS and Legionnaires' disease, Lyme disease seems to have come recently from nowhere. Does it reflect a mutation of microbes? A change in human immunity? Some subtle shift in the environment? Good questions. And so is the one the beach house friends were asking each other: What did we do to deserve this?
THE EDITORIAL NOTEBOOK
The numbers make clear that Mayor Koch's welcome plan for mental patients on city streets will amount only to a frustrated gesture unless both New York City and State commit more resources for care of the mentally ill in the community.
The ragged man shuffling through the bus terminal . . . the wild-eyed woman bundled in sweaters and coats on a 90-degree afternoon: Such are the pathetic symbols of failed mental health policy. This summer, the number of them roaming the streets in fear and fantasy seems, Calcutta-like, to have increased sharply. All need help; few ever get it.
Teams of city psychiatrists and social workers are supposed to evaluate such people and, when there is danger, send them to hospitals. But the teams have operated only sporadically, and the hospitals usually release these patients quickly, given the trouble of winning court-ordered commitments. The result is a permanent population of ''revolving door'' mental patients, whose long periods of wandering are interrupted only occasionally by brief hospital stays.
To help get them off the streets, Mr. Koch proposes relieving the street-work teams of other duties so they can focus on the homeless mentally ill. He also calls for broadening the definition of which mentally ill people are dangerous. And he would add 28 beds to Bellevue's intake unit.
The plan immediately aroused the anxiety of the Civil Liberties Union, which promises to monitor implementation. That's all to the good: a court challenge would either vindicate the Koch plan or become the basis for reform of commitment laws. The much harder task is to stop the revolving door. City psychiatric wards already overflow; even the suicidal or homicidal can't be assured of admission. Mr. Koch's 28 new beds can't do much about a shortfall in the hundreds.
The larger shortfall of small community residences for the mentally ill poses the most fundamental problem. It results from long neglect. State officials released tens of thousands of mental patients from big upstate hospitals without providing adequately for their community care. Given upstate lobbying power, the underpopulated upstate hospitals still receive a huge chunk of state mental health funds. Meanwhile, city officials designed their homeless policy around mass congregate shelters - intimidating to those homeless who are also mentally fragile.
If the Mayor presses his new plan, he would usefully direct attention to both problems. State officials already make positive noises about finding more resources. And they point to Richard Surles, Governor Cuomo's designee as state Commissioner of Mental Health. He is credited with administering a progressive foundation-funded program of community mental health in Philadelphia.
How much more hospital and community care space the city might provide remains to be seen. Mayor Koch deserves credit for recognizing the need for a new approach. But until both city and state make good on the promise of community care, the revolving door will turn and turn.
''They don't need to get an education, because according to statistics I've seen, they only have but five years to live.'' That's a local comment from Arcadia, the Florida town that ostracized the Ray family, whose three boys have been exposed to the AIDS virus. In Pleasant Valley, Pa., parents yesterday demanded mandatory testing of all schoolchildren and segregation of those with AIDS, after the state education secretary ruled that a 6-year-old with the virus must be educated in regular classes. Washington has still not got through the message that the AIDS virus is not spread in the classroom.
Though AIDS cannot be casually spread, fear can. Instead of combating fear, Arcadia's leaders seem to have been the first victims of the contagion. The Mayor, George Smith, says gay groups have prevented the Government from acting against the spread of AIDS. His wife, Sue Ellen, says that in reading about AIDS ''You get scared when it involves your own children, because you realize all the assurances are not based on solid evidence.''
But Government health officers oppose mandatory testing for the AIDS virus because it would be ineffective, not because of some gay conspiracy.
Assurances that the AIDS virus is not casually transmitted are indeed based on solid evidence, gained in part by careful monitoring of members of AIDS victims' households.
Other schools accept children with AIDS, while assessing each child's condition case by case. But in Arcadia the school board barred Richard, Robert and Randy Ray, presumably exposed to the AIDS virus through the blood products needed to treat hemophilia.
When they were ordered admitted by a court, other parents boycotted the school, the Rays received telephone threats and last week lost their home to a fire. They have decided to leave Arcadia, and say they want the donations people have begun to send to go to teaching Arcadians the facts about AIDS.
That the Arcadias and Pleasant Valleys of America should still need such instruction is a failing of local leaders and of those in Washington who set public policy and education programs on AIDS. There is much about AIDS to fear, but not that it spreads in workplace or classroom.
The Mayor of New York has fallen off the wagon, toppled by a chocolate cake. After his recent stroke, his doctors urged him to diet; good intentions appear to have lasted about 17 days. The wonder is that his diet held on that long.
For one thing, Edward Koch loves food. He is, after all, the man who choked on a piece of watercress, who once swooned after spaghettini with garlic followed by veal chops parmigiana and who boasts of his skill at tracking down cheap restaurants.
For another thing, dieting is hard in a city with a food cart around every corner. Unless he wears blinders, a mayor on a diet has to stay out of some parts of town. The foot of Wall Street, for one. There are 18 food stalls there, The Times reports, selling Jamaican curried goat, Indian curried chicken, Greek souvlaki kebabs, Chinese egg rolls, Mexican burritos, Israeli fried falafels, mozzarella puffs, hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza and ice cream.
No, this is not the place for Ed Koch. Neither is the South Street Seaport, with its floors of fast food. Neither is Little Italy, especially during the Feast of San Gennaro. It starts next week, which means that New York's finest forchetta would be well advised to keep off Mulberry Street.
If, come 1989, Mr. Koch runs for a fourth term, his palate will have to run too. He'll have to demonstrate anew his taste for knishes, calzone, tacos, dim sum and empanadas. All the more reason, if he really wants to see 190 (and the scale) again, he should seize the moment. Now.
Stop Wasting Lives, and Money
On Tuesday, a committee of business executives will publish a finding that could, over the next 16 years, change urban America. After decades of disappointment with anti-poverty programs, society is discovering that it knows how to do something that works:
Concentrate on helping poor children in their earliest months and years of life.
The business leaders, who joined with educators on a Committee for Economic Development research panel, are not usually aroused by issues like prenatal health or enriched pre-school education. But now they are; something's stirring in the political underbrush.
With presidential candidates already attracted to children's issues, this could be the season to seize the moment.  Save Three Children
Social welfare strategies have rolled in like waves. First it was housing, then services like social workers and clinics, then income strategies. None turned out to conquer poverty. Early childhood intervention won't do that, either. But instinct and social science affirm its powerful promise.
Consider the famous Perry Preschool Project in Ypsilanti, Mich. In the early 1960's, it began offering preschool to 3-year-olds from poor homes and with below-average I.Q.'s.
In a rare long-term study, researchers followed 123 children until their 19th birthdays. They did remarkably well. They graduated from high school and went on to jobs or more education at twice the rate of children without the additional early schooling. They also had fewer arrests, detentions and teen-age prenancies.
A year or two of early schooling so enhanced the children's confidence and sense of control that, as the researchers reported, their ''better performance is visible to everyone.''
All the more reason not to wait until a child is 3 or 4 years old. Why not start with prenatal care for frightened mothers, often children themselves? Why not provide classes in basic skills for fathers? An array of such services could save three children at once: The teen-age mother, her baby and the child she is persuaded to defer at least until she has finished school and gained both maturity and job skills.  Spend Where It Counts
Americans are generous about social welfare when they know it works, as with Head Start or food stamps. But they have learned to feel for their wallets when experts talk grandly about new schemes. Why should they react differently to early childhood intervention? Because it is known to work.
Strong evidence comes from the Perry Project. It cost $4,818 per child in 1981 dollars. But Ypsilanti recovered $3,100 almost immediately; the preschoolers required less remedial education and services. Other dividends have mounted as the years pass.
Another kind of arithmetic shows that early childhood intervention pays off. There were 240,000 low birthweight babies born in 1984. Hospital costs during the newborn period averaged $20,000. Complete prenatal and maternity care would have averaged about $3,500 - and probably would have produced healthier babies.
Experimental programs are already under way in several cities. One of the most ambitious is the Beethoven Project in Chicago's Robert Taylor Homes, the largest public housing project in the world. The program provides prenatal care and parenting education for expectant mothers, and eventually will offer developmental programs for infants and toddlers as well.
The idea is to deliver to the nearby Beethoven Elementary School in 1992 a class of kindergarten boys and girls physically, mentally, emotionally ready for school. If the experiment proves out, it will vindicate the conviction of the Committee for Economic Development panel that ''improving the prospects for disadvantaged children is not an expense but an excellent investment.''  From Abortion to Consensus
Attitudes about children have changed dramatically in the 15 years since then-President Nixon denounced then-Senator Mondale's developmental day care bill as something like Godless communism. Now, it's possible to identify and energize a potential coalition on behalf of early childhood intervention.
The issue engages basic and volatile issues like the sanctity of the family and parents' right to raise their children by their own best lights. Now, black churches have mobilized to help young women deal with illegitimate babies and minority parents respond to voluntary programs. Teen-age mothers need and want all the help they can get.
People on both sides of the abortion debate who care about family values join comfortably to promote early childhood measures. For instance, Representative Henry Hyde, the Illinois Republican who is a leader of the pro-life movement, sponsors legislation to give Federal health insurance to poor pregnant women.
Several Presidential hopefuls press for early childhood measures; New York City is already developing a program for school at 4. In Congress, the relevant Senate and House committees will conduct a rare joint hearing this week to consider early childhood legislation. Such a consensus is promising. To help children when help does the most good is an idea any citizen can appreciate. Likewise, the consequences of not helping children who lack a fair chance are also obvious.
Imagine a baby girl born into inner-city poverty today, to a teen-age mother. With an early childhood program, she'd be more likely to be born healthy; her mother could give her better care; and early schooling would enlarge her self-confidence. In 16 years, she'd probably be starting her last year in high school and have ambitions for the future. Without such a program, she's all too likely to have something else: a baby. And the heavy cycle will start again.
Stop Wasting Lives, and Money
On Tuesday, a committee of business executives will publish a finding that could, over the next 16 years, change urban America. After decades of disappointment with anti-poverty programs, society is discovering that it knows how to do something that works:
Concentrate on helping poor children in their earliest months and years of life.
The business leaders, who joined with educators on a Committee for Economic Development research panel, are not usually aroused by issues like prenatal health or enriched pre-school education. But now they are; something's stirring in the political underbrush.
With presidential candidates already attracted to children's issues, this could be the season to seize the moment.  Save Three Children
Social welfare strategies have rolled in like waves. First it was housing, then services like social workers and clinics, then income strategies. None turned out to conquer poverty. Early childhood intervention won't do that, either. But instinct and social science affirm its powerful promise.
Consider the famous Perry Preschool Project in Ypsilanti, Mich. In the early 1960's, it began offering preschool to 3-year-olds from poor homes and with below-average I.Q.'s.
In a rare long-term study, researchers followed 123 children until their 19th birthdays. They did remarkably well. They graduated from high school and went on to jobs or more education at twice the rate of children without the additional early schooling. They also had fewer arrests, detentions and teen-age prenancies.
A year or two of early schooling so enhanced the children's confidence and sense of control that, as the researchers reported, their ''better performance is visible to everyone.''
All the more reason not to wait until a child is 3 or 4 years old. Why not start with prenatal care for frightened mothers, often children themselves? Why not provide classes in basic skills for fathers? An array of such services could save three children at once: The teen-age mother, her baby and the child she is persuaded to defer at least until she has finished school and gained both maturity and job skills.  Spend Where It Counts
Americans are generous about social welfare when they know it works, as with Head Start or food stamps. But they have learned to feel for their wallets when experts talk grandly about new schemes. Why should they react differently to early childhood intervention? Because it is known to work.
Strong evidence comes from the Perry Project. It cost $4,818 per child in 1981 dollars. But Ypsilanti recovered $3,100 almost immediately; the preschoolers required less remedial education and services. Other dividends have mounted as the years pass.
Another kind of arithmetic shows that early childhood intervention pays off. There were 240,000 low birthweight babies born in 1984. Hospital costs during the newborn period averaged $20,000. Complete prenatal and maternity care would have averaged about $3,500 - and probably would have produced healthier babies.
Experimental programs are already under way in several cities. One of the most ambitious is the Beethoven Project in Chicago's Robert Taylor Homes, the largest public housing project in the world. The program provides prenatal care and parenting education for expectant mothers, and eventually will offer developmental programs for infants and toddlers as well.
The idea is to deliver to the nearby Beethoven Elementary School in 1992 a class of kindergarten boys and girls physically, mentally, emotionally ready for school. If the experiment proves out, it will vindicate the conviction of the Committee for Economic Development panel that ''improving the prospects for disadvantaged children is not an expense but an excellent investment.''  From Abortion to Consensus
Attitudes about children have changed dramatically in the 15 years since then-President Nixon denounced then-Senator Mondale's developmental day care bill as something like Godless communism. Now, it's possible to identify and energize a potential coalition on behalf of early childhood intervention.
The issue engages basic and volatile issues like the sanctity of the family and parents' right to raise their children by their own best lights. Now, black churches have mobilized to help young women deal with illegitimate babies and minority parents respond to voluntary programs. Teen-age mothers need and want all the help they can get.
People on both sides of the abortion debate who care about family values join comfortably to promote early childhood measures. For instance, Representative Henry Hyde, the Illinois Republican who is a leader of the pro-life movement, sponsors legislation to give Federal health insurance to poor pregnant women.
Several Presidential hopefuls press for early childhood measures; New York City is already developing a program for school at 4. In Congress, the relevant Senate and House committees will conduct a rare joint hearing this week to consider early childhood legislation. Such a consensus is promising. To help children when help does the most good is an idea any citizen can appreciate. Likewise, the consequences of not helping children who lack a fair chance are also obvious.
Imagine a baby girl born into inner-city poverty today, to a teen-age mother. With an early childhood program, she'd be more likely to be born healthy; her mother could give her better care; and early schooling would enlarge her self-confidence. In 16 years, she'd probably be starting her last year in high school and have ambitions for the future. Without such a program, she's all too likely to have something else: a baby. And the heavy cycle will start again.  COST-EFFECTIVE PROGRAMS  WIC: Food for Women, Infants, Children
Reduces infant mortality, increases birthweight. Participation: only a third of those eligible.
$1 spent on prenatal portion can save $3 in short-term hospital costs.  Prenatal Care
Increases birthweight and reduces premature births in mothers who otherwise forgo prenatal care in the first trimester.
$1 investment saves $3.38 in the cost of care for low birthweight infants.  Medicaid
Reduces neonatal and infant illness and abnormalities through Early Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment Services. In 1986, 2.1 million were screened.
$1 spent on comprehensive prenatal care for Medicaid recipients saves $2 in first-year care.  Childhood Immunization
Reduces rubella, mumps, measles, polio, diptheria, tetanus and pertussis. In 1983 more than 3.4 million children were immunized under the program.
$1 spent on childhood immunization saves $10 in later medical costs.  Preschool Education
Increases shcool success and employability and reduces dependence. Only 20 percent of those eligible participate in Head Start
$1 spent preschool education can save $4.75 in later social costs.  (Sources: House Select Committee on Children, Youth and Families.)
An expectant mother who consults her obstetrician regularly vastly reduces the chance that her baby will come into the world too soon or too small. Yet frequently in America, more than in most other industrialized countries, women don't get such prenatal advice. The payoff for providing it -healthy children, happy mothers and cost savings -would be enormous. That's why an innovative program in the Bronx bears watching.
Consider Regina, a young mother. She received no prenatal care for her baby Tyrone, now 2 years old, and he was born only 26 weeks after conception. He weighed 2 pounds 1 ounce, and spent the first three months of his life in an intensive care unit. At $1,000 a day, that came to $90,000 and he still needs medical attention.
Now Regina is five months into her second pregnancy, and visits the Bronx clinic run by the Program to Reduce Obstetric Problems and Prematurity, or Propp. On the clinic doctors' advice, she says, she doesn't lift heavy objects, walks less and follows a diet. She has learned, she says, ''to love my baby before it is born,'' and even has a printout of her medical history for use in an emergency. Regina and her physicians believe this baby will be born on time and healthy.
Propp is run by the Albert Einstein College of Medicine with Montefiore Medical Center, with funds from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the March of Dimes and the Federal Government. Propp staff members spend days at high schools and evenings at community boards promoting prenatal care. They also coordinate prenatal services in Bronx hospitals and clinics and gather voluminous birth data.
It costs only $500 to provide an expectant mother with adequate prenatal care. Yet treating a low-weight infant can cost $180,000 even before leaving the hospital. Many such infants require chronic care or institutionalization.
Other nations have cut their pre-term birth rates to 5 percent; the figure for the United States remains a dismal 8 percent. It's 15 percent in the Bronx, even higher in some poor neighborhoods. The Surgeon General has set a national goal of reducing the figure to 5 percent or below. Expanding Propp might make that happen.
An article on Aug. 27 about women in New York who are infected with the AIDS virus reported a growing belief among scientists that all AIDS virus carriers will eventually develop the fatal disease. That statement did not adequately reflect the diversity of views among scientists on this issue.
The subject is examined in detail today in the Doctor's World column, page C1.
Until 30 years ago, replacing sick organs seemed the stuff of fiction. So, until nine years ago, did conceiving a baby in a petri dish. Now another medical marvel is on the horizon: using fetal tissue to treat nerve disorders.
Because fetal tissue is adaptable and resistant to immunologial rejection, researchers say it has immense potential for treating Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's chorea, spinal cord injuries, diabetes, leukemia, aplastic anemia and radiation sickness. It also has immense potential for provoking controversy.
Abortion opponents fear that the medical use of fetal tissue will legitimize what is to them an abhorrent practice. Pro-choice activists fear that the demand for fetal tissue might be akin to the demand for babies - and equally exploitive of females. If some women are willing to lease their wombs to women who can't have children, they fear, then some women would be equally willing to lease theirs for the production of fetal tissue.
It would be a shame if this controversy stood in the way of valuable medical advances, since the objections can be met by applying familiar rules for the handling of human organs removed for transplant or research. A Federal law bans the sale of human organs; it could be readily amended to ban the sale of fetal tissue as well, thus eliminating any possible financial incentive for pregnancy.
Other rules, based on ideas suggested last year by a Federal Task Force on Organ Transplantation, might be written to govern collection and use of fetal tissue, easing anxieties of those concerned for prenatal life.
State legislatures and courts have responded thoughtfully to questions about life and death raised by other new medical advances. The debate about this one, with all its potential benefits, can be conducted with similar compassion and similar sense.
Mayor Koch's proposal to remove homeless people from New York City's streets and confine them in Bellevue Hospital appears to be an unauthorized rewriting of New York State's mental health law and a violation of constitutional liberties.
Focusing the blame on the state mental hygiene law, which he asserts prevents him from protecting homeless people from serious harm, he is threatening to change the commitment standard without legislative approval.
The real obstacle to mental health care for the homeless is the serious shortage of beds for psychiatric patients caused by the lack of community mental health programs in New York City. Unfortunately, the Mayor's program ignores this problem and promises services that the crisis-ridden mental health system has been unable to provide.
Whenever government proposes to remove citizens from the streets and confine them involuntarily in a mental hospital, fundamental civil liberties are at stake. Individuals are deprived of their freedom of movement and association, they are separated from friends and community and they are frequently subjected to intrusive and in some cases potentially harmful treatment procedures without their consent.
Because commitment is, in the words of the Supreme Court, a ''massive deprivation of liberty,'' government's exercise of this power must be limited by statute and constitutional principles. Before a person can be involuntarily confined in a mental hospital in New York State, the individual must be shown to have a mental illness and to present a real and present danger of substantial physical harm to himself or others.
The mental hygiene law gives the Mayor the legal authority to direct city officials to hospitalize any homeless person who is mentally ill and cannot survive safely on the street. But, as the courts have repeatedly made clear, government does not have the power to hospitalize harmless people who are capable of meeting their basic survival needs, even if they appear to be disheveled or their standard of living is considered low. The proposed policy threatens this group the most.
For the last two years, New York City has supported legislation in Albany that would permit the commitment of so-called gravely disabled people - those who are not presently dangerous but may, at some speculative future date, become so. The proposal failed in both years.
Nevertheless, Mayor Koch now threatens to adopt such a standard without legislative approval. If he does so, he will have exceeded his legal authority. He has been less than candid in his efforts to win public approval for his policy. He has not addressed the real problem: the severe shortage of in-patient beds and community mental health programs.
According to a report by the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation, the crisis is so severe that many seriously disturbed patients are forced to wait for days in psychiatric emergency rooms, where they may be crowded into chairs, strapped to stretchers and handcuffed to wheelchairs because no beds are available.
We are aware of many other patients who have been turned away at the emergency room doors despite their requests for help. Moreover, there are not enough community programs to care for the patients after Bellevue Hospital ultimately discharges them.
This crisis has existed for years, because city and state officials have failed to muster the resolve to address these problems. The situation has deteriorated to such a point that the New York Civil Liberties Union and the Coalition for the Homeless have sued the city to compel it to provide these basic services.
The Mayor's new program does not ease the crisis; it ignores it. Unfortunately, the directive is another empty promise: It purports to offer treatment to the mentally ill yet fails to provide the necessary resources.
The real problem lies not in the commitment laws but in the city and state governments' failure to develop community mental health programs. The Mayor owes it to New Yorkers to provide a realistic and constitutional solution.
The insurance industry has filed suit to block a regulation proposed by the New York Insurance Department that would prohibit insurance companies from testing applicants for health insurance for exposure to the AIDS virus. The insurance industry has a valid point.
Insurance companies are supposed to charge insurance buyers a price that reflects the risk presented by an individual buyer or by a group of similarly situated buyers.
In seeking to test insurance applicants for exposure to the AIDS virus, life and health insurers are trying to abide by this principle. For example, out of 1,000 34-year-old males who test positive for the presence of the AIDS antibody, which indicates infection by the virus, at least 200 will die of AIDS within seven years, according to the National Centers for Disease Control.
By contrast, actuarial tables tell us that of 1,000 34-year-old males in standard health, 7.5 will die within seven years. Those who test positive, therefore, are 26.6 times more likely to die within seven years than 34-year-old males in standard health. To ignore the risk factor responsible for this 2,666 percent risk differential is bad insurance policy.
However, other factors must be considered in assessing whether a particular restriction on AIDS testing might nevertheless be good social policy. They include the following:
* The magnitude of the impact of a particular restriction on the insurance industry.
People who apply for insurance as individuals are tested to determine the likelihood of their developing various diseases, such as diabetes and heart disease, but those who buy insurance as a group are not.
Because group insurance accounts for 90 percent of all health insurance, but less than 50 percent of all life insurance, prohibiting AIDS testing for health insurance would have a relatively minor impact on the health insurance business, while prohibiting testing for life insurance would have a more substantial effect.
* The effect of permitting testing on those at risk for AIDS.
The gay community argues that insurers cannot possibly guarantee confidentiality and that a breach of it to someone who tests positive can be devastating. A proposed Massachusetts regulation, however, if enforced, would seem to offer true confidentiality: It sets up a ''need to know'' standard for disclosing the results of an AIDS test even to other individuals in an insurance company.
* The effect of prohibiting testing on those not at risk for AIDS.
If testing for AIDS is prohibited, people in standard health and people at risk for other diseases will subsidize those at risk for AIDS. Whether lawmakers are willing to accept such a subsidy would seem to depend on its cost for each policy holder, which insurers could easily calculate. So far, however, they have failed to do so.
* The alternatives to permitting testing.
If insurers are prohibited from testing, they will use less accurate, and more offensive, methods of determining who is at risk for AIDS. For example, they may seek to charge higher rates to all unmarried males living in zip code areas with a large proportion of gay men.
States may prohibit insurers from either testing for AIDS or using sexual preference or any surrogate for sexual preference as a risk factor, as the District of Columbia has done. But they cannot force insurers to write insurance under those conditions. The heavy-handed but not entirely unjustified response of several insurers to the District's AIDS law has been to stop doing business there.
The best solution to providing health insurance for those at risk for AIDS is national health insurance. By spreading the cost of AIDS as widely as possible throughout society, the burden on any individual will be minimal.
Unless such a system is enacted, any ''solution'' will be a compromise. The compromise reached by the New York Insurance Department may be reasonable. But we should recognize that insurers that want to test for infection by the AIDS virus - and to decline to insure those testing positive - have sound insurance principles on their side.
The Reagan Administration's reported proposal to increase Medicare health insurance premiums 38.5 percent makes sense according to the actuaries: this is no callous effort to soak the aged. At the same time, however, it makes clearer than ever the need for new policies to hold down medical costs.
Medicare pays hospital bills for all Americans over 65; those who also want coverage for doctors' bills must pay a premium. Coverage under this ''Part B'' program is far from full - doctors may charge more than the amount Medicare will reimburse, and there is a deductible of $75 per year. But the premium is only $17.90 per month.
Now the Reagan Administration reportedly plans a sharp increase, of $6.90 a month, to $24.80. Perhaps a quarter of the increase will go to replenish a depleted contingency fund. And the doctors are entitled to an increase for general inflation.
That still leaves about $4.40 the actuaries say will be needed to cover accelerating costs. After increasing about 8 percent per year in 1985 and 1986, Medicare payments for doctors' services in this fiscal year have jumped 22 percent. Some of that may reflect efforts to speed up reimbursements. But some also arises from greater ''volume and intensity'' of services. Doctors are submitting bills for more procedures, at greater cost, per Medicare patient. Many of the bills surely are legitimate, but Medicare managers suspect many doctors are also finding ways now to make up for freezes on reimbursements that lapsed in January. Such practices include billing for more costly diagnoses than symptoms warrant or finding ways to diagnose several illnesses for a case that ought to involve one.
Over the long term, the problem could be addressed by shifting to ''capitated'' plans, where the patient pays a single annual fee for health care through a health maintenance organization or other physicians' group. But there are far too few of them to accommodate the 31 million people on Medicare.
A modest short-term response might be to increase the $75 deductible, intended to spare Medicare the cost of routine or frivolous consultations. Raising it to, say, $125 would not impose great hardship and could bring sizable savings.
A more ambitious approach involves using the vast data pool in Medicare's computers. The files make it possible to determine average billings for Medicare patients in a given region - and to identify doctors who consistently claim more. Such a doctor might deserve every penny, if he takes on many complex and difficult cases. But Medicare certainly has the right to ask, and to refuse payments where the physician has no good answer.
At best the computer tracking could reduce the need for ever greater premiums while guaranteeing fair payments to doctors. At least it would put doctors on notice that Medicare is watching, as well it should.
The fire is spreading and we can see it from our house. But we stand in the doorway and say it is not our fire; it is theirs, those people down the street, and we don't like them anyway. Then we go inside; but still it spreads.
Sadly, that still sums up the attitudes and emotions of many Americans, and their Government, toward the AIDS epidemic.
Two issues of importance make this clear. One is whether AIDS is something that homosexuals and drug addicts should worry about but the rest of us can really forget, beyond an expression of compassion from time to time. The other is now before Congress: should the Federal Government try, at least try, to prevent discrimination against AIDS victims?
A lot more than emotion is involved. These two issues will decide if the country sees AIDS as a national problem to be attacked nationally or as something that can be segmented and confined to those others. And that in turn will decide how much money, energy and planning will go into the effort against AIDS.
The first question is bubbling up more and more: look, I am a heterosexual and I don't take drugs or sleep with junkies. Isn't the truth that tomorrow, as today, the victims will be the same - homosexuals, and addicts stupid enough to use dirty needles?
The spread of AIDS to heterosexuals is documented, in bitter statistics. Dr. Sheldon H. Landesman, director of the AIDS study group at the State University of New York Health Science Center in Brooklyn, says that in New York City alone there are 100,000 intravenous drug-using males who have been infected with AIDS and there are 15,000 to 20,000 women who have been infected by having sex with addicts using contaminated needles. Only God knows how many other women will get the virus in the years ahead.
But will these women spread AIDS to heterosexual men who will then spread it to other heterosexual women? There are few known cases of that having happened in this country.
But to assume it will not happen, in a disease known only for a few years and still mysterious in nature, origin and transmission, is the most dangerous kind of self-deluding complacency. AIDS has become heterosexual in Africa and to say it cannot happen here is not science but Russian roulette.
Katie Leishman, writing in the February 1987 Atlantic Monthly on heterosexuality and AIDS, put it this way: ''It can't hurt to think of the virus as having an intelligence, and a commitment to survival that exceeds that of many people.''
There is no cure or vaccine for AIDS, and there may not be for decades. Therefore only people can fight it - people with the AIDS virus and people without it. Without the effort of one group, the other will fail.
The untouched need the help of the sufferers and the AIDS carriers, who have to make the moral commitment not to have sexual intercourse with those not affected. There is no other way for the victims to guarantee -for their own souls' sake - that they are not spreading death. American society must persuade those who may have had sexual intercourse with carriers to be tested.
So it is plain self-interest - as well as plain humanity - to try to protect anybody who may carry AIDS from the fearful discrimination, bigotry and isolation that goes with the disease. We will never succeed entirely, but at least the sufferers and their friends and families can be shown that the country is trying, through social education and through legislation.
And now, along comes the Reagan Administration and announces that it is against proposed Federal legislation aimed at protecting AIDS victims from discrimination. Leave it to the states, says Dr. Otis R. Bowen, Secretary of Health and Human Services. That is a stand that helps neither health nor human services.
There is no legal reason to prevent a Federal statute forbidding discrimination against AIDS victims. And the Administration acknowledges that infected persons have been subject to discrimination.
But Dr. Bowen says it should be fought state by state. Or, don't do in one way what can be done 51 different ways - provided some states want to do it at all.
Dr. Bowen explains that under a system of state anti-discrimination laws, each state and Congress ''will be able to observe and learn from the results.''
AIDS carriers also will learn from Dr. Bowen. They will learn that as far as Federal protection is concerned they are abandoned. The ''moral commitment'' argument to AIDS carriers will still be valid. But unless Congress refuses to go along with the Administration's callousness, that argument may ring terribly hollow.
ON MY MIND
To the Editor:
In ''The Other AIDS Epidemic'' (Editorial Notebook, Sept. 3), Nicholas Wade rightly condemns the dangerous results of addressing the AIDS crisis from a position of ignorance. In discussing the infectious fear that brought devastating violence upon the Ray family of Arcadia, Fla., whose three sons had been exposed to the AIDS virus, Mr. Wade appropriately places blame on that town's leaders, saying they ''seem to have been the first victims of the contagion.''
It would be almost reassuring if this were in fact the case. In the last two years, the New York City Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence Project has documented literally dozens of incidents of AIDS-related violence right here in New York City. In attack after attack against those perceived to be either persons with acquired immune deficiency syndrome or to be at risk for AIDS, assailants have made reference to the illness as justification for their violence.
These acts, which have ranged from harassment to homicide, which have taken the form of crimes against both person and property, have been perpetrated against men and women, young and old, regardless of their race, religion, ethnicity or socioeconomic status. The attacks have occurred in all five boroughs, as well as in the surrounding suburbs. Most of the victims of these attacks have been lesbians and gay men; AIDS seems to have provided yet another excuse for gay bashing.
What happened to the Ray family is deplorable. It is unfortunate, however, that the media for the most part have chosen to see this event as an isolated incident. The attack against the Rays is no more or less pernicious than the beating of a gay man in Brooklyn, or the destruction of an AIDS sufferer's home in Harlem. Every victim of this type of violence is blameless. All of us must face and address the intense hostility that so easily arises out of fear and ignorance. DAVID M. WERTHEIMER  Executive Director  New York City Gay and Lesbian  Anti-Violence Project  New York, Sept. 4, 1987
''Hey, sweet lady, no smile today?''
I'd been deep in thought, on my way across Tompkins Square Park, in Manhattan, to buy a paper. I looked up from the ground to see him standing squarely in my path, tall and bearded and black.
He gave me a huge smile of encouragement. There was nothing to do but give him a huge one back.
''That's more like it,'' he said, and beamed after me as I went on my way.
But this was absurd, I thought. Here I was, newly appointed gentry, with my condominium apartment in a renovated landmark building overlooking the park, and here he was, homeless, down and out, telling me to smile.
I walk though the park at least half a dozen times a day, back and forth from home to groceries, bus and so on, and, one way or another, I've struck up a casual acquaintance with some of the dozens of homeless men who live there - a nod, a smile, a short chat perhaps, no more. But that's all that's needed. Only strangers ask me for money. The homeless who live here don't ask: They respect the fact that I live here, too. All they ask, it seems, is acknowledgment of their presence, something other than the blank-eyed stare that looks right through them as if they don't exist.
It doesn't sound too bad, considering. But every time I think I've gotten used to it, the veil of habituation drops and I see the squalor again.
Living with so many homeless on my doorstep has forced me to acknowledge a lot of things I'd rather not. They are unesthetic, that's plain. On sultry summer mornings, the park smells like a flophouse. Heaps of ragged clothes and blankets are strewn everywhere; supermarket trolleys are piled high with trash can gleanings; the litter of paper and broken bottles is a daily challenge to city clean-up and gardening crews.
All that's unpleasant, but the problem goes far deeper than esthetics. Living in sight of the homeless threatens every one of us. In a city devoted to scaling the heights, we are faced every day with the depths, and the obvious truth is, we'd rather not know. ''Take them away, please,'' we say, ''anywhere but here.''
When I moved here, I thought I accepted the presence of the homeless in the park, and saw those who opposed shelters on their blocks as mean-spirited, stony-hearted bigots. But I could afford that attitude: I don't have children.
If I did, I wouldn't live on Tompkins Square. I wouldn't want my children to watch the shuffling hopelessness, to know that squalor is accepted as normal. And I now realize that if I lived in Queens, I wouldn't want a shelter on my block either. I'd want to protect my children against that kind of knowledge.
But ''taking them away'' -whether to shelters or psychiatric institutions - won't solve the problem. Mayor Koch's new plan to institutionalize the mentally ill homeless would apply to perhaps four or five of the men in Tompkins Square, no more. Municipal shelters only hide the homeless, and they don't address the three major problems that I see in this park: alcoholism, illiteracy and what seems to be a learned helplessness.
For example, the park poet sat me down last week to hear one of his tirades against the bomb, the superpowers, government and Wall Street. He chanted it out loud, swigging from a bottle of cheap wine as he went. It took me some time to realize he was illiterate; he relies entirely on memory. He may be paranoid, but he's also intelligent. I asked, why not try for a job? ''I just can't deal with it,'' he replied, not in complaint, but in a dull, flat statement of fact.
Alcoholism is not an urgent enough problem to qualify under the Mayor's new program. Illiteracy is not a psychiatric disease. Neither is chronic inability to function in society. It's easy for those who are esthetically disgusted to say, ''They could get off the streets if they wanted,'' but the truth is they can't - the learned inability runs too deep, the alcoholism is too chronic, the illiteracy too limiting. Most no longer have the ability even to want.
Of course, I am biased. Of course, I would rather there were no homeless people in ''my'' park. Owning property itself raises challenges to tolerance. But I also firmly believe that in this city of unparalleled riches, homelessness degrades those who own homes as much as those who lack them. When we learn to accept homelessness, we become part of the squalor.
Providing care for the dramatically mentally ill, though praiseworthy in itself, is merely a small start. Any serious effort necessitates a huge, long-term, concentrated program of social work and rehabilitation. I know the city can't afford this. That's why I would be willing to pay extra city taxes earmarked specifically for such a program. Unless the homeless are on your doorstep, would you?
Never before have we had an Administration so eager to subject people to a variety of tests.
By executive order, President Reagan followed the urging of Defense Secretary Weinberger and then-C.I.A. chief William Casey to place 110,000 Federal workers under the pressure of the so-called lie detector - which real spies can easily fool, but which instills fear in whistle-blowers.
Testing for drugs is another favorite demand. Attorney General Meese is forcing 60,000 Justice Department employees to submit to blood testing or face dismissal.
Testing for AIDS has been the most widely accepted intrusion into the bodies of citizens. What Mr. Reagan calls ''routine'' testing is mandatory; a blood test given everyone entering a hospital is reasonable, but may be the entering wedge for much wider pandering to public fear.
In some cases, an argument can be made for testing: the two military men with the keys to launch an intercontinental missile attack should know that they give up all privacy rights to get those stressful jobs. We tolerate such exceptions, putting public safety before individual rights, just as we willingly submit to searches at airports.
But in most cases, testing is a simplistic solution that poses a greater danger than it addresses. Now our testiest Administration has to live with the irony of its pernicious habit of intrusion; consider recent instances in which dangerous mental-physical problems went unobserved in two powerful officials.
William Casey, our Director of Central Intelligence and foremost advocate of polygraphs, took a ''lie detector'' test every month to set an example. He used to laugh at such tests, because he knew he could beat them; that was why he could challenge James Baker to such a test when the two men clashed over knowledge of the Carter briefing book in ''Debategate.'' (Oversighters and inspectors general might like to see the records of those old Casey tests now, to see how ineffective and misleading the C.I.A. polygraph was.) Yet here was a statutory adviser to the National Security Council whose brain cells were being attacked by cancer for at least a year, with the disease that was ravaging his judgment undiagnosed, even while doctors were treating him for cancer of the prostate.
Director Casey was increasingly irritable and short-tempered, and friends noted his loss of physical coordination in holding a highball glass upright, but not until he collapsed with a seizure was his head examined. Only then was a large lymphoma discovered, presumably too advanced for the customary radiation or chemotherapy treatment and requiring immediate surgery.
Next case: Michael Deaver was the President's closest personal adviser. He was the advance man who selected the Bitburg cemetery with its Waffen SS graves as an appropriate spot for Mr. Reagan to visit. He was the chooser of ambassadors, architect of Nancy Reagan's publicized anti-drug campaign, and was in touch with the First Lady several times a day.
He now swears he was an alcoholic, and I believe him. As a defense against a perjury charge, Mr. Deaver reveals he was hospitalized in January 1985 for kidney failure related to alcoholism, and was detoxified at Georgetown Hospital again in June of that year. In between - in late February 1985 - he was the man the Reagans sent to Europe to determine the Presidential itinerary.
Was the First Lady so involved with her crusade against drug addiction that she failed to notice that her closest confidant was a drunk? Alcoholism is neither a sin nor a crime; when recognized and treated, it is an addiction that can be triumphed over, and Mr. Deaver is now fighting his way back to health. But the man needed help long before he was hospitalized; didn't the Reagans or the Presidential doctors know? Didn't they realize, after his first hospitalization, the risks to the nation in sending a man in such deep trouble on a sensitive diplomatic mission?
I do not suggest that Presidential aides or National Security Council members or advisers be given ''routine'' physical or mental tests. I do suggest that people at the top keep an eye on each other, and when one begins acting funny, to make certain that high official is tested or the President warned of any refusal of testing.
Physician, heal thyself; make certain the people in the nation's most sensitive posts are of sound mind and body rather than force all the rest of us to take tests to prove ourselves healthy.
ESSAY
A Federal task force on cholesterol advises consumers who want to reduce the risk of heart disease to drink skim milk or milk with 1 percent milkfat. But many who find those products unappetizing choose tastier ''2 percent'' milk, also labeled ''low fat.'' How much riskier can that be?
The answer is, much riskier. The percentage figures are misleading because they refer to the amount of milkfat by fluid weight. Yet milk consists mainly of water. The more meaningful measure of potential risk is the percentage of calories contributed by milkfat. The figures are 27 percent for 1 percent milk and 38 percent for the 2 percent product. The figure for whole milk is about 50 percent; skim milk contains no fat.
Milk rates second only to beef as the largest source of saturated fat in the American diet. The American Heart Association now recommends that people avoid any milk product containing more than 1 percent fat.
Yet the Food and Drug Administration lags in trying to clear up the confusion. The agency's newly proposed cholesterol labeling rule sets two grams of fat per serving as the maximum for a food to qualify for the ''low fat'' label. But under an outdated 1972 regulation, 2 percent milk, which contains five grams per serving, may still be sold as ''low fat.''
The regulation needs a healthy update.
It sounds like a President's dream: a way to strike powerfully against drug abuse and AIDS . . . possible to put into effect virtually overnight . . . with no need for new legislation or significant new public cost. The dream is a plan to relax rules for methadone distribution. Yet so far, the Reagan Administration hesitates to make it a widespread reality, apparently because of old arguments that have lost their force.
Heroin abusers eventually weary of their enslaving addiction. When they do, many think first of methadone, a drug that blocks the heroin craving and permits a stable, productive life. In New York City alone, some 30,000 heroin addicts are now on methadone. The treatment programs are oversubscribed and addicts requesting help can wait for months.
Why not expand the programs? Money isn't the issue; methadone costs little. It is distributed on an outpatient basis through established clinics that could physically accommodate many more patients without strain, or community opposition.
The issue is Federal regulations. The addict must be enrolled in a comprehensive program of counseling and other services, with one counselor available for every 50 patients. To inhibit unauthorized use, the rules even forbid giving out methadone as pills; it must be served as a liquid in paper cups. State laws often repeat and elaborate upon the Federal regulations. Distributing more methadone in compliance with such rules would require heavy expenditures for staff and clinic space.
Supporters of the rules point out that methadone is itself an addictive drug, however benign its effects. Heroin addicts are likely to abuse other drugs as well, so methadone addresses only part of the problem. The best treatment, they say, is psychological counseling designed to alter dependent personalities.
Those who favor greater access to methadone say psychotherapy remains impractical. Freeing addicts of all drug dependency remains chancy. The intensive psychotherapy must take place in residential centers that can't hope to accommodate the need - New York City's have places for only 3,000. Expansion would mean wrangling with communities over new sites.
Relaxed rules, however, could permit immediate distribution of methadone to thousands more outpatients. While some might continue to abuse other drugs, their escape from heroin still would be a step forward. Since February, several clinics have been distributing methadone more freely in pilot programs under a waiver of the rules, apparently without adverse effect.
AIDS adds new urgency. It spreads rapidly through needles shared by addicts. Methadone, administered orally, reduces needle use. And fear of AIDS motivates more and more addicts to seek methadone.
Relaxing the rules would require no new legislation, just action by the Food and Drug Administration. Such a revision at the Federal level surely would prompt states to relax their rules as well -and so reduce waiting, crime and AIDS.
While the AIDS epidemic gets its grip on America, Mr. Reagan's Administration spouts, postures and neglects effective measures to curb it.
The President's commission on AIDS has begun to self-destruct. In July, the White House charged a panel of members, almost uniformly unqualified, to develop a national strategy. After three months of inaction and bickering, the staff director was ousted, and last week the chairman and vice chairman resigned.
Retired Adm. James D. Watkins, former Chief of Naval Operations, is to be the commission's new head. He is an able leader but knows even less about AIDS than his fellow commissioners. To expect this motley group to develop a competent strategy is like asking a panel of physicians to design the Navy's next attack submarine. The White House has no AIDS strategy and a commission with no chance of producing one.
Users of intravenous drugs are the main conduit by which the AIDS virus will spread further. Infecting each other by sharing needles, they may pass on the virus heterosexually to their partners. The Administration's top practical goal in curbing AIDS should have been to insure, years ago, that treatment was available for any addict seeking to quit drugs. Yet a shortage of drug treatment spaces persists throughout the country. Some addicts still must wait a year for treatment.
New York, unlike most states, has found money to expand its programs but community groups and local leaders have thwarted construction of any new treatment centers. So the state needs 8,000 more treatment spaces to eliminate its waiting lists. Meanwhile, those 8,000 addicts continue to spread the AIDS virus among themselves and their sexual partners.
If the AIDS virus breaks out from homosexuals and drug addicts, the first group likely to become infected are those at risk from other sexual diseases. A top priority of any serious AIDS strategy would be to educate such people in the use of condoms to protect against such diseases.
But syphilis has increased by 35 percent this year, and has roughly doubled in New York City and Los Angeles. Experts have not seen such a dramatic rise in 20 years. By this yardstick, Administration efforts to protect heterosexuals against the spread of AIDS have proved wholly ineffective.
AIDS is the most serious threat to public health in decades. Historians will look back in astonishment at the Reagan Administration's flaccid response during the first eight years of the epidemic's spread. They will ask how any President could fail to implement the most obvious public health measures, or tardily assign the making of national strategy to a quarreling commission with no recognizable expertise. They will wonder how his Cabinet members could be torpid spectators of the virus's spread, seeing it only as a pretext for impressing their own morals on others.
But the wondering historians will find no answers. Mr. Reagan's refusal to lead, to take a personal interest in AIDS or set a policy and see it effectively conducted is beyond comprehension or excuse.
In Washington one enchanted evening, a handsome young American Navy officer spots this beautiful young woman. They eye each other hotly and soon exit to her limousine, where they proceed to tear each other's clothes off in the back seat. An excellent time is had by both. Afterwards, as they say, he asks her name.
In New York, a book editor, a woman, lures the married lawyer into a dinner date, after their first business conference. In an hour or two they are in her apartment adjacent to the meat market, making love on the kitchen sink.
Also in New York - obviously a particularly passionate city - a teacher in his twenties keeps leaping from his convertible to try to entice the interest of young women who arouse his desire. A 19-year-old redhead who happens by does not need much enticement; within minutes they are spending a very merry afternoon hour in his car, this time on the front seat. Sated, he goes back to playing baseball in the park with his class of 10 year olds, sweetly teaching them that the game is like life itself.
Back in Washington, the members of the Presidential commission on AIDS do nothing much but waste time for a few months. Then they come to a tremendous decision: kick out the physician-chairman and reorganize, putting an admiral in charge! And the Administration decides to fight a bill that would penalize discrimination against AIDS sufferers.
To return again to New York, a weekly newspaper for homosexuals, The New York Native, carries many stories about AIDS. It also carries columns of paid ''personals'' wherein gay advertisers speak of their urgent interest in meeting strangers for the purpose of sexual encounter of one sort or another. Some of the ads come from male prostitutes, a particularly high-risk group for AIDS, and some suggest homosexual anal intercourse, the most dangerous form of sex.
What's the connection between copulating couples, the AIDS commission, the anti-discrimination bill and the friendly fornication ads in the paper? Simply that the U.S. may be scared about AIDS, but not enough to conquer politics or lust - for the dollar.
The lovers are in three movies, currently making fortunes at local multi-cinemas. Condoms? Not in the scripts. AIDS is a lousy love story, as one of my motion picture friends said to me. Can't argue with that.
Yes, Hollywood is talking about getting around to recognizing that the backseat of the limousine, first time out, can lead to the grave. But, aside from one or two pictures, it still is all to come later, later.
Censorship is not needed; creativity is. Surely imaginative movie makers can find solutions, like backdating some of the first-encounter movies to a pre-AIDS era. That at least would entertain nostalgia fans.
And if the immediate-action scene is set in the present, it would be plain realism to bring up the subject of wariness of AIDS rather than pretend it did not exist. It will be a lot easier than the boycotts and unprofitable X-ratings that may come instead.
Movies about intelligent people making love to strangers without thinking of AIDS are false, stereotypes of the carefree lover. Hollywood learned to eliminate other stereotypes - the Andy Hardy adolescent, the shuffling black or the slinky Chinaman. It can teach itself to eliminate this one, which would be a creative step, not a restrictive one.
Money, of course, rides on exactly how, when and where sex is shown in a movie. And money is involved in the male prostitute ads in gay publications. Here, too, no censorship is needed or desirable. But the gay community might say out loud how it feels. That should do it.
In Washington, the fear of AIDS is not as strong as the power of politics and ideology. That's why the commission is failing and why the Administration will not accept the idea of an anti-discrimination code relating to AIDS.
The Administration does not seem able to peer over the ideological wall and see that national self-interest lies in giving the most possible protection to those from whom most will be demanded in preventing the spread of the disease - the sufferers themselves.
So, here are two messages that might be of particular interest to Hollywood and Washington. One is from Surgeon General C. Everett Koop: ''Do not have sex with people that you do not know and whose state you cannot attest to.''
The other is from David Brown, the producer and writer, who was not involved in the three fast-sex movies: ''The end line is that most of us really do not believe the warnings or statistics. Or we think they are not for us.''  ON MY MIND
WIC (Women, Infants and Children) is one Federal nutrition program that has never even been accused of that famous trio of offenses against Reaganism known as Waste, Fraud and Abuse. The program is unquestionably well targeted, and has saved lives, health and dollars. But sad to say, it reaches only 44 percent of those eligible - and the Senate Agriculture Appropriations subcommittee is making it very hard to reach more.
WIC provides diet supplements and checkups for poor pregnant and nursing women and their children. It began in 1973 but it wasn't until 1986, when the results of a new study were published, that Congress found out just how good the program really is.
Babies born to WIC mothers had significantly larger heads than comparison newborns, which according to the study's director is an almost certain reflection of greater brain size. WIC also increased the gestation period and reduced the incidence of fetal and early infant death. And while there was no consistent evidence that WIC increases the birth weight of infants, there was a significant relationship between birth weight and the quality of the local WIC program. The better the programs, the bigger the babies.
Small wonder, then, that 51 senators in a joint resolution have asked for an additional $150 million for WIC next year. That would increase the number enrolled in the program by 4 percent - or 300,000 ill-fed people. That such an increase is needed is further indicated by a new report from the Federal Centers for Disease Control. That study concludes that the rate of anemia among poor children enrolled in WIC dropped by almost two-thirds from 1975 to 1985.
The Agriculture Appropriations subcommittee, however, has decided against $150 million. It thinks $48 million will do. That mean that WIC can add a mere nine-tenths of one percentage point more to its rolls - and that thousands of women will lose out on the nutritional supplements and care that will save them heartbreak and save society big medical bills.
To take the long view, which is just what the subcommittee isn't doing, is to see the long-term value of WIC. Now it's up to the full Senate Appropriations Committee to eschew such shortsightedness, reject the subcommittee's recommendation -and give WIC that much-needed $150 million.
While speeches boomed from a platform behind the Capitol at last Sunday's gay rights march, a quieter ritual took place near the Washington Monument. A quilt was spread on the grass, a huge quilt made of 2,000 panels, each commemorating one of the 25,000 Americans who have died of AIDS.
Volunteers had begun unfolding it at sunrise while the names were being read aloud. After three hours of reading and unfolding, the quilt covered more than an acre.
Most panels are colorful and personal, with names, birthdates, photos or clothing sewn into them. One of the 22 anonymous panels reads: ''I have decorated this banner to honor my brother. Our parents did not want his name used publicly. The omission of his name represents the fear of oppression that AIDS victims and their families feel.''
Conversation took place mostly at a whisper, amid muffled weeping and the occasional sound of electronic timers, which are carried by those taking the anti-AIDS drug AZT. One woman said she wanted to sew a panel for a dead friend. So did someone else, and someone else. Some people got down on hands and knees to write names in a blank space near the center of the quilt. By midday the space was filled.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
The Noble School District in Norman, Okla., is reluctant to call an aide an aide. Last week it announced that library aides and teacher aides will be called assistants because of public anxiety over AIDS.
It is hard to imagine children fleeing in terror from grown-ups introduced as teacher or library aides, but the school district apparently isn't taking any chances.
Such is the price of paranoia. Does it portend a linguistic backlash? Will school nurses now cease administering ''first aid'' and switch to ''first assistance''? Will first aid kits around the country now have to be recalled from off factory walls and out of Boy Scouts' backpacks for relabeling?
White House and Congressional aides are invaluable to the news media in supplying information about the inner workings of government. Will they give interviews only to journalists who refer to them as ''assistants''? What of drugstores with their beauty aids, cosmetic aids and foot-care aids? Will corporate America turn on products like Kitchen-Aid dishwashers and Band-Aids?
The Noble School District could have found a better solution: Teach students that ''aide'' doesn't mean ''AIDS,'' and that even if it did, panic and fear would be inappropriate responses.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
Doctors who refuse to care for AIDS patients are raising grave questions about the integrity of the medical profession.
Although the number of doctors who have publicly announced their boycott of AIDS patients is small, almost certainly there is a much larger number who sympathize with their more vocal colleagues and will follow in their footsteps.
A news story last July reported that one-quarter of 258 doctors in training at New York hospitals said they thought it was not unethical to refuse to treat people suffering from acquired immune deficiency syndrome. Surely, as more reports surface about health-care workers accidentally infected with the AIDS virus, we will learn of more doctors withdrawing from the AIDS arena.
A Milwaukee heart surgeon, quoted in the news story, was straightforward. ''I've got to be selfish,'' he said. ''I've got to think about myself; I've got to think about my family. That responsibility is greater than to the patient.'' His statement does not help the already battered image of the physician in the eyes of the community. How they must be turning in their graves, those Athenian physicians who, according to Thucydides, in the midst of a plague in the Peloponnesian War ''died themselves the most thickly, as they visited the sick most often.''
But why should I be surprised at my colleagues' behavior? They are merely reflecting the breakdown of the same ''old-fashioned'' societal values that in part have contributed to the emergence of the AIDS scourge.
That breakdown was expressed in the hedonism that the ''me generation'' of the 70's espoused while engaging in the sexual promiscuity that led to the spread of AIDS.
Today, it is expressed in the kindred selfishness found in the Milwaukee surgeon's unabashedly articulated views.
I do not mean to belittle the fears of such physicians. I share their concerns every time I use a bronchoscope - a fiber-optic instrument - to examine the lungs of a patient with AIDS.
I, too, have a wife and children to support and I hope to spend decades more with them. But if every doctor who loved his family and life followed the Milwaukee surgeon's logic, who would be left to treat AIDS patients?
Aside from the ethical ramifications of doctors' decisions not to treat AIDS patients, the risks posed by such treatment have been unscientifically exaggerated.
When one considers the hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of contacts between AIDS patients and medical personnel that have taken place, and the mere handful of case reports of AIDS virus infections that have occured as a result of gross violations of the most rudimentary precautions, the small risk of accidental contamination becomes apparent.
The decision by some doctors not to treat AIDS patients - a decision criticized by Dr. C. Everett Koop, the Surgeon General of the United States - will only reinforce the irrational, often hysterical fear of contagion held by large segments of society. It will further complicate the lives of those unfortunate enough to be infected. We doctors have an obligation to the public to calm irrational AIDS-related fears, not to abet them.
I cannot help but wonder if the preponderance of gays and drug addicts among AIDS patients influences the decision not to treat such patients. What if AIDS were predominantly a disease of wealthy VIP's in politics, sports and the entertainment industry? Would the risk-benefit ratio swing toward treatment in those cases?
AIDS will be around for years. The issues raised by a small group of doctors who refuse to treat AIDS patients do the medical profession a disservice. How we physicians react to this problem will tell us a great deal about whether we deserve the respect and deference that were once the hallmark of the physician.
The images lend a grim whiff of the Middle Ages to modern New York City hospitals: Patients in desperate straits - devastated victims of AIDS, pregnant women on the verge of labor - lie shackled and chained to their beds.
It's wholly gratuitous indignity and discomfort. These city prisoners are in no condition to flee or cause trouble. Many aren't even convicted of crimes and are prisoners only because they have no money for bail. State prison officials have long prohibited such barbarity for ailing convicts except in those very rare cases where the patient remains uncontrollably assaultive; the city's Department of Correction ought to do the same.
Ideally, ailing prisoners should be confined to secure wards set up to prevent flight. But only two such wards exist in the city hospital system, at Bellevue and Kings County. Their combined capacity of 66 can't possibly meet the demand, now increasing as more inmates develop AIDS. And the two secure wards are for men only; all female patient-prisoners are sent to general wards. Thus in 1986, some 800 city hospital patient-prisoners were placed under constant surveillance and shackled. On a given day, about 20 may now lie in chains. Pain and indignity are considerable. Movement produces chafing and cuts from the leg irons. The restlessness that accompanies fever brings special torment. A patient must ask permission and be unshackled to visit the bathroom. One AIDS patient remained shackled for more than 90 days.
City hospitals need additional secure wards where shackling is not practiced and costly one-on-one officer surveillance is unnecessary. The first new beds in such an expansion ought to be reserved for women. In the meantime, why not give the prisoner-patients on general wards freedom from their chains? Any who are not too sick to think of fleeing are adequately deterred by the presence of prison guards at bedside.
Shackling of the sick has no place in a city that would call itself humane.
''We have got to call a spade a spade,'' said Senator Jesse Helms in offering an amendment to the fiscal 1988 appropriations bill for the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, ''and a perverted human being a perverted human being.'' Ironic comments, indeed, given the profound perversity of the policy his amendment advances.
It prohibits the Federal Centers for Disease Control from funding AIDS programs that ''promote, encourage or condone homosexual activities.'' The Senate passed it, 96 to 2. Only 47 House members had the good sense and common decency to resist homophobic hysteria and oppose the amendment.
Mr. Helms introduced it because he's upset with New York's Gay Men's Health Crisis. The organization has established a brilliant reputation in caring for and counseling those with AIDS and in educating others on how to prevent the spread of AIDS.
It serves gay men - Mr. Helms's ''perverts'' - because they're a primary AIDS risk group. Gays comprise about 10 percent of the United States' adult population, or 20 million people. If only half are male, 10 million men are at risk and in need of education and counseling on how to cut the risk. That's why the Gay Men's Health Crisis and organizations like it around the country exist.
The amendment, protests Senator Edward M. Kennedy, is ''toothless'' and ''a foolish exercise.'' Then why did he vote to make it the law of the land, particularly since it ignores the proved effectiveness of AIDS education efforts and severly impedes our ability to expand them?
To date, New York has had 11,513 AIDS cases reported; of these, 6,605 have died. Of the total cases, 55 percent are homosexual or bisexual men. Among these, the Gay Men's Health Crisis and city educational efforts have helped contribute to a decline in the seroconversion rate to 1 percent annually. In nonscientific terms, this means that if you took blood samples from homosexual or bisexual men one year and found them not infected with the AIDS virus, there's only a 1 percent chance that samples from the same men would be infected the next year.
Among intravenous drug users there's an 8 percent seroconversion rate. Obviously, education changes behavior among those whose faculties aren't impaired and enslaved by needles and drugs.
Gay Men's Health Crisis materials, complains Senator Helms, use blunt words and sexually graphic illustration that ''perpetuate the AIDS problem.'' But those the materials reach aren't innocents who'll be shocked by such literature. They already practice sex; they want to know how to practice it more safely. The organization tells them and thereby helps save lives.
If we're shy with one risk group, we'll probably make the same mistake with others. Today, AIDS is found principally among men who engage in homosexual or bisexual practices or intravenous drug abuse. By 1991, some 40,000 people in New York and 270,000 nationally may have AIDS. Some will be heterosexuals who've had intercourse with a bisexual man or a drug user. If they don't know how to protect themselves, how will they? Cutting off Federal funds to organizations like the Gay Men's Health Crisis may only help spread the disease, causing the deaths of not only homosexuals but heterosexuals of both sexes and, most tragic of all, innocent infants.
Senator Helms may not like homosexuals. But he and those who voted for the amendment should remember that homosexuals - and intravenous drug users - are the sons and daughters of families who love them. They too deserve protection against the gravest public health threat our nation faces.
Regrettably, lousy politics overwhelmed good public health policy. Apparently fearing an adverse reaction that a homophobic demagogue might inflame in their home state or districts, members of Congress gave in to homophobic hysteria. Only a few had the courage to vote against this foolish amendment. I commend Senators Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Lowell Weicker and members of New York's House delegation who joined the honor roll: Gary L. Ackerman, Bill Green, Major R. Owens, James H. Scheuer and Ted Weiss. They hold the moral high ground.
The amendment is a fait accompli. The blot on the Congress can't be erased. But what can't be undone can be uncovered. That alone may insure that future Congressional action on AIDS ignores the homophobes by supporting programs and policies that have proved so effective in fighting this tragic disease.
The AIDS epidemic spread so far because initially no one took it seriously enough: Government, the media, researchers, blood banks and the gay community each found their own reasons to ignore or deny the threat. That's the compelling theme of ''And the Band Played On,'' by Randy Shilts. It's a highly readable account, full of valuable reporting and insight. But the theme, despite strong elements of truth, is a selective exercise in hindsight.
Mr. Shilts, a reporter for The San Francisco Chronicle, tells the horrifying case of the late Gaetan Dugas, a Canadian airline steward who spread AIDS from coast to coast in the early 1980's. Of the first 200 men diagnosed, 40 had had intercourse with Mr. Dugas. Despite warnings, he continued to infect others because ''Someone gave it to me.''
The book graphically describes the gay bathhouses, their extreme sexual practices, the cruel deaths of those wracked by AIDS, and gay leaders' stubborn opposition to closing the houses down. But some of Mr. Shilts' analytical contentions warrant review. ''People died while Reagan administration officials ignored pleas from government scientists and did not allocate adequate funding for AIDS research.''
True, funding was inadequate at first, but the critical step toward discovering the cause of AIDS - developing a test-tube cell line in which the AIDS virus would grow -was made in the laboratory of Robert Gallo. His work was well funded. An extra billion in 1982 and 1983 would not have hastened that discovery. More is now known about the AIDS virus, which was discovered only three years ago, than about other disease viruses that have been recognized for decades. Mr. Shilts denounces the blood banks for denying that AIDS could be spread by transfusions and then for refusing to screen donors with a test for hepatitis, with which many AIDS victims are also infected. He doesn't mention that the blood banks were already using other hepatitis tests, and did ask people in high-risk groups not to donate blood. Because of hepatitis, the New York Blood Center had asked gay men not to donate blood before AIDS was even heard of. The book chides gay leaders and their followers for resisting public health advice to close the bathhouses in San Francisco and New York. Mr. Shilts surely has a point. But a valuable precedent was set in the compromise then struck between civil liberties and public health - to keep the baths open while warning patrons against high-risk sex. Moving punitively might well have created an atmosphere of harshness and panic that would have ignited the public to exclude all AIDS children from school or to force victims out of jobs and into quarantine.
''And the Band Played On'' applies withering hindsight to society's shortcomings, almost none to its successes. It overlooks the scientific feat of identifying the AIDS virus and developing an antibody test, achieved in record time. It gives no credit to the equally striking social achievements. Most Americans have so far refused to panic in the face of a terrifying disease, or to oppress the barely tolerated minorities that are its focus.
Mr. Shilts dispenses blame readily: ''The bitter truth was that AIDS did not just happen to America - it was allowed to happen by an array of institutions, all of which failed to perform their appropriate tasks to safeguard the public health.'' A fairer verdict would be that, despite initial delay, most institutions have responded with sensitivity and skill. The major exception is the White House, which from the beginning has lacked interest and leadership in confronting the plague of our time.
New York City's Department of Correction has stationed two officers outside Hedda Nussbaum's private room to guard her 24 hours a day. Has it really been necessary also to shackle and chain her by one leg to her hospital bed?
Hedda Nussbaum faces charges in the tragic death of 6-year-old Elizabeth Steinberg. She has a fractured jaw and fractured ribs. Her nose is broken. She has cuts and severe bruises all over her body. This once-vibrant woman looks like someone just out of a torture chamber.
It's doubtful that the chain and shackle have been necessary to prevent her from assaulting other patients or medical personnel at the City Hospital Center in Elmhurst, Queens. She was too battered to make a court appearance earlier this week, alongside the man accused of savagely beating her and the child. It's equally doubtful Ms. Nussbaum could run very far. Even if she had the will to try, it would surely be surprising if the guards sat idly by.
There is no such shackling, nor costly surveillance, in secure medical wards set aside for male prisoners in city hospitals. But no secure wards exist for women prisoners who require hospital care. Decency argues for creating at least one secure ward for women prisoners. Ms. Nussbaum's plight is hardly unique. Yesterday, eight other women prisoners, most of them awaiting trial, lay sick, in chains, while guarded round-the-clock.
The public may feel conflicted about Hedda Nussbaum, charged with complicity in the beatings of a little girl. But she is also a victim. Shackles and chains inflict a kind of battering - for no good reason. Shackling is prohibited by state prison officials. The city's Correction Department now says that it will no longer shackle women, and will stop shackling men in general population wards within a week. When it does, it will be not a day too soon.
To the Editor:
Last week's hearing for Billy Boggs - the name given to authorities by the first person hospitalized under Mayor Koch's effort to remove mentally ill homeless people from Manhattan's streets - focused attention again on New York City's homeless (news story, Nov. 5). Specifically, it focused attention on the Mayor's program of committing involuntarily homeless people deemed mentally ill and a danger to themselves or to others.
I have known Billie Boggs - as Joyce, her real name, the one she gave the neighborhood people she talked to - for a year and a half. Our conversations have been countless. We are friends, and it was as a friend that I was involved in last week's proceedings. I spent the days with her in court and the evenings visiting her at Bellevue Hospital Center's Ward 18 West (the 28-bed facility Mayor Koch has set aside for the program).
After a week of being frustrated over randomly changed and severely restricted visiting policies (restrictions set by Joyce's attending psychiatrist, but ordered lifted by Acting Justice Robert D. Lippmann of the State Supreme Court), of preparing affidavits and testimony on two occasions until midnight and 2 A.M., and of watching her lawyers fatigued after sleepless nights, I have a better understanding of the homeless, if not the solution to their problems.
However, as I watched Ward 18W fill with patients last week, and became friends with several of them, a flaw in the policy became apparent. Mayor Koch's program allows for a ward of 28 homeless people. It does not allow for, and cannot accommodate, the 23 individuals being kept there, individuals with unique problems, needs and pasts, whose only common denominator is their preference for living outside. That is not enough to justify the uniform and blanket manner in which they are being treated. Being homeless has, under this project, resulted in having their individuality - the essence of being human - invalidated and stripped from them.
For example, one female patient has only partial sight. She needs a guide dog (she had them in the past) or a walking cane. She has neither. I have never seen a staff member escort her. I have seen her bump into things. She is expected to answer dinner, snack and treatment calls promptly. She spends most nights in shelters or in the Y, but was picked up during the day sitting with her belongings, which she keeps with her to avoid having them stolen.
Mayor Koch cannot be held solely responsible for solving the problems of New York City's homeless or its mentally ill. That responsibility is shared by us all. Maybe thinking of these people as individuals is the first step. Only then can their differing needs for institutionalization, foster care, outpatient therapy, low income housing or freedom, as in Joyce's case, be met.
BILL SAXON
New York, Nov. 9, 1987
Joyce Brown's claim that she has a right to live on the street, supported this week by a judge, may stimulate dinner parties and Philosophy I discussions. But in practical terms, her case is beside the point. Sweeping the mentally ill off the streets makes no sense unless the authorities are in a position to care for them properly.
Ms. Brown fell subject to Mayor Koch's order that the homeless mentally ill who refuse help should be brought in anyway. Her challenge raised a fascinating question: At what point does offensive eccentricity constitute dangerous insanity? Confronted by an articulate plaintiff and contradictory psychiatrists, the judge found no case for danger.
The practical significance is slight: Mr. Koch's campaign is only a token response to a massive problem. There are perhaps thousands of mentally ill homeless - pathetic victims of the deinstitutionalization that closed down upstate hospitals without providing for outpatient care. The Mayor's ''sweeps'' have so far brought in only 25.
The primary issue is how to accommodate the multitudes who are desperate for care. That one or two refuse help is a secondary concern. Thus the Coalition for the Homeless recently filed suits on behalf of the mentally ill homeless, including a man named John Heard.
According to the Coalition complaint, now awaiting the city's response, Mr. Heard was taken to Bellevue last winter ''for suicidal ideations,'' only to be released to the streets when he got better. But ''after several cold winter days living on the streets, Heard's mental condition deteriorated rapidly and he again became suicidal,'' the complaint alleges. He then sought help at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn, where officials arranged for his transfer to the state's South Beach Psychiatric Center on Staten Island. When he again got better, hospital officials said he could stay or go. ''He chose to leave. South Beach gave him $20 and discharged him.'' Since then, the complaint states, he has bounced from shelter to flophouse to hospital as his suicidal depressions recur.
The lawsuits call for city and state compliance with a law requiring appropriate discharge planning and after-care. Experts agree that ''revolving door'' patients could be helped if there were more options: supervised residences of various sorts and ''drop-in'' centers offering a meal, a clean bed, eventually counseling and treatment. A few such places already exist; there ought to be scores.
City officials argue, with reason, that their primary obligation should be emergency care; long- term treatment and supervision are an obligation of the state, which mismanaged deinstitutionalization in the first place. Albany may finally be ready to agree. Richard Surles, Governor Cuomo's new acting commissioner of mental health, developed programs of community care in Philadelphia.
The city could therefore turn the new homeless lawsuit to its advantage in pressing a claim for more funds from Albany. But however it responds, it ought to keep its priorities in order: the problem isn't the single troubled woman who says she likes life on the street; it's the hundreds, even thousands, who hate it.
Testing to help curb the AIDS epidemic can be either voluntary or compulsory, but that's a choice only in theory. A compulsory program would drive underground the intravenous drug abusers and gay men who most need to be reached. No wonder public health officials overwhelmingly prefer voluntary tests.
But many potential victims will refuse voluntary testing without safeguards. That's why it becomes steadily more imperative that Congress overcome its hesitancy and guarantee test confidentiality and protection against discrimination.
Anyone found to be infected with the AIDS virus has a compelling interest in keeping that information private. Disclosure may lead to the loss of friends, job, insurance or apartment. Guaranteeing an absolute right to privacy might overcome the resulting deterrent to testing. But an absolute right collides with the right of others to know the test results, like sexual partners, hospital staff and public health officials. declined to inform their sexual partners and have forbidden their doctor to do so. Doctors are bound by law and ethics to respect a patient's confidentiality, but courts have held they have a higher duty to warn those whom a patient may specifically endanger. A bill on AIDS testing proposed by Representative Henry Waxman of California would allow physicians to inform a sexual partner, if the patient refuses to do so himself, without incurring state penalties.
Another plausible exception to total confidentiality is for the contact tracing systems run by some state health authorities. Tracing and treating a patient's partners has proved effective in controlling syphilis and venereal disease. With the AIDS virus, there is little treatment yet to offer. Still, informing people that they are infected may save them from infecting others. In Colorado, with a vigorous tracing system, some 27 percent of partners agreeing to be tested were found to have the virus. Although half already knew it, that can in some states be an efficient method of reaching the infected. Tracing programs have long operated with near-perfect confidentiality.
Still, some breaches may be inevitable, as when a patient tells partners who tell others. Hence there's a strong need for laws to deter discrimination against people with AIDS.
The Waxman bill sets up the necessary legal framework in which public health policy and AIDS testing can be most effective. It would enforce confidentiality with strict fines, allowing exceptions for a physician to warn partners and to report cases if required by state law. The bill would also require all centers receiving Federal funds to make anonymous testing available, and bar discrimination against the infected, whether in jobs, housing or government services.
Some Republican members of Mr. Waxman's committee deride these non-discrimination provisions as a gay rights bill. No, it's a public health bill, intended to induce the one million Americans already infected to be tested and counseled before they infect others. The Administration opposes the bill, saying the states' laws suffice. But in many states the protections are too weak and will take years to remedy.
Uniform Federal protections offer the best chance of bringing AIDS under control. Promoting voluntary testing is the way to do so without trampling on individual rights and dignities. It's also the only way that can work.
Present tests for the AIDS virus antibody are highly accurate. Yet if applied to the population at large, they could falsely brand nine people infected for every true case identified. The President's AIDS commission had better be sure it understands this treacherous paradox if it intends to recommend the widespread testing favored by some Administration officials.
Applied to groups at high risk for AIDS, like gay men and drug abusers, the tests are highly reliable, and the minute number of false positives is dwarfed by the large number of true positives. The testing of prostitutes, as suggested last week by Stephen Joseph, New York City's health commissioner, is worth considering because 20 to 60 percent may be addicts, and the proportion of false positives would probably be minute.
But that's not true of groups at low risk, among whom the very small number of true positives can easily be less than the number of false positives. If a low-risk group - like blood donors in Peoria, for instance - were screened for AIDS by the Elisa test, with its positive results confirmed by the Western blot test, 89 people out of 100,000 would be labeled as carrying the virus. But the real incidence of AIDS infection among this group probably is 10 per 100,000. The tests would miss one of the 10, catch the other nine and falsely describe 80 other people as carriers of the virus, according to new estimates by Lawrence Miike of the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment.
Such screening programs can easily do more harm than good, needlessly devastating dozens of lives for every case of infection detected.
The Army has been testing military recruits, a low-risk group, for two years. Its chief tester, Col. Donald Burke, believes that the rate of false positives is less than one in 100,000 people tested. At a recent Congressional hearing, Colonel Burke urged mass screening to identify almost every infected person in America. But the Army is able to insist on unusually rigorous standards from its testing laboratories. States and local authorities setting up mass screening programs would reap many more false positives. Not only is the Western blot test for AIDS antibodies very difficult to perform, but there is not yet a generally agreed way to interpret its results. The slightest inaccuracy or sloppiness - a notorious problem with medical laboratories - quickly leads to more false diagnoses than true.
Commercial laboratories recently given negative samples to test by the College of American Pathologists reported nearly 2 percent as positive by the Elisa test and 5 percent as positive by the Western blot. This joint error rate, according to the Office of Technology Assessment, means that in screening a low-risk population, up to 90 percent of people confirmed by the two tests as infected will not be.
People infected with the AIDS virus risk loss of jobs, insurance and housing. What responsible government could assume the burden of falsely telling nine people they were infected for each true infection identified? The cost of screening low-risk populations could be over $50,000 for each true positive detected. In states that seek to reach infected individuals for counseling, there is an innocuous and cheaper alternative - tracing the sexual and needle contacts of those already diagnosed.
Several members of the President's AIDS commission have indicated a predilection for testing various groups at low risk for AIDS. One, Cory Servaas, pressed the American Medical Association last week to say why it wasn't urging doctors to test all their patients. If the commission advocates widespread screening without insisting on far more accurate testing than is now available, it will create a program for shattering more lives than it saves.
Sidney Flax was wounded in a dive bombing attack while serving with the U.S. Army in Naples in World War II. He recovered, returned home, married, raised a family and worked in a bank until he suffered a stroke two years ago. His right arm and side are paralyzed; his right leg had to be amputated.
Since July, he has become part of an experiment. Three mornings a week, he travels by ambulette to the Veterans Administration complex in St. Albans, Queens. There, he and 75 fellow veterans aged 60 to 104 join in a cost-effective way to help the elderly. It truly does save money; better, it enriches their lives. It's an experiment that deserves to spread nationwide.
Many of the men who come to the Adult Day Health Care program would otherwise be in nursing homes, acute-care wards of hospitals or simply deteriorating at home as shut-ins.
On a recent morning, the St. Albans center saw patients suffering from Alzheimer's disease, cancer, blindness, heart failure and stroke. They worked out with exercise equipment, bent and turned in ''adapted yoga and movement,'' shouted lustily at bingo, bowled. Even a wheelchair patient took part. A retractable handle allowed him to grip the bowling ball and roll it down the lane. The recreation is combined with health monitoring that often can head off readmission to a hospital.
Important as it is to the ailing men, the program also serves their wives, who themselves may be unwell. In health-care parlance, the wife is known as a ''care-giver.''
One such care-giver is Helen Flax, whose daily routine now includes fastening and removing her husband's artificial leg, helping him to the bathroom, cutting up his food. She also tries to keep up his morale. Until they discovered the St. Albans program, ''My husband was locked in a shell. Now he has livened up. He chats with other patients and the staff . . . They're getting him to move his arm; he's learning to stand, to balance his weight. Sidney is trying.''
Mrs. Flax and the other wives may also participate in a monthly support group run by Charles Sanky, the program coordinator. Day Health Care does almost as much for their health and morale. The program provides them with time off from care-giving, time to get some sleep, attend to their own health problems, perhaps even hold a job. Group therapy helps them express and share anger, pain and fear.
Adult day health care has long been practiced in England's ''day hospitals.'' It is taking hold slowly in this country. Only in 1983 did Congress authorize such programs in 15 veterans' hospitals. The slow growth of adult day health care is dismaying. Acute care in a hospital costs Medicare $600 a day. Care in a skilled nursing home runs $150 a day. The St. Albans program, which can avert both, costs only $42 a day.
While the V.A. makes the program available free to veterans, and Medicaid would pay the cost for the indigent, it remains uncovered by Medicare. The news from St. Albans is obvious: Here is one expansion of an entitlement that, while doing good, could also save real money.
On Nov. 11 the New York City Department of Correction declared it would put an end to the barbaric practice of shackling ailing prisoners to beds in city hospitals. Shackling of women prisoners was to end immediately, which it did. Male prisoners were to be freed of their shackles a week later. As of yesterday about two dozen men, including some suffering from AIDS, remained in chains, manacled to bed rails and posts at Bellevue Hospital.
The shackling insults decency while serving no purpose. There can be no excuse for continuing it even for another day.
Ailing prisoners remain escape risks - the three who disappeared from Rikers Island last weekend were recuperating in the jail's hospital from injuries. But those subject to shackling are sent from the island to city hospitals, usually because their conditions have deteriorated. They ought to be treated in secure city hospital wards designed to prevent escapes, but there are only two, at Kings County Hospital and Bellevue.
When they overflow, prisoner-patients are sent to non-secure wards and shackled to their beds. The shackling is superfluous. Each such prisoner is also observed round the clock by correction officers. The one-on-one supervision of seriously ill prisoners virtually precludes escape.
The indignity and discomfort, meanwhile, are extreme. Shackles abrade the skin and restrict movement in bed; they also require the patient to beg for permission to use the toilet. Most of those shackled haven't been convicted of a crime; they are awaiting trial, in some cases on minor charges.
A 49-year-old man recovers from a colostomy; his shackles are a bizarre addition to multiple drainage and feeding tubes. An AIDS patient, sent to a city hospital from the jail hospital when his condition became critical, says he would rather die at Rikers. There, at least, he did not have to endure chafing from the leg iron, or shuffle to the bathroom with his legs chained together.
By what failures of bureaucracy and humanity does such a scene from the Dark Ages persist in a modern city hospital?
Barbarity has returned to the treatment of sick prisoners, thanks to a prison guards' lawsuit and a timid judge. Chaining such prisoners to their hospital beds is not just cruel; it's superfluous. But the guards insist that this is a matter of collective bargaining, not humanity. They will have a hard time making that case; meanwhile, why do the courts insist on putting back the chains?
The case arose because the New York City Department of Correction finally decided to stop shackling seriously ill inmates, who are in any event guarded round the clock, one-on-one, by correction officers. The new policy took effect a month ago. Leg irons were removed from a dozen women. At last they could turn on their sides and were no longer subject to constant chafing and abrasion. This week the department also started unshackling hospitalized male prisoners found to pose virtually no risk of escape or harm.
Frightened, the Correction Officers Benevolent Association went to court to block the new policy. It argues that Correction Commissioner Richard Koehler has no authority unilaterally to modify conditions of inmate confinement if the new policy endangers the safety of its officers. That, says the association, is a matter for collective bargaining.
State Supreme Court Justice Kenneth Shorter temporarily stayed the department's initiative and ordered the chains put back. Next week the union will ask that shackling be continued until the matter is laid before the Office of Collective Bargaining. Commissioner Koehler's position is that this is a managerial, not union, issue, and that his directive recognizes the safety of officers and brings more humane treatment to ailing inmates.
Other jurisdictions have experience guarding hospitalized inmates without chains. State prison officials forbid them as a throwback to the Dark Ages, except in rare cases. They have experienced no escapes or violent incidents for as long as anyone can remember.
The union has a right to litigate. But the matter won't be resolved by the Office of Collective Bargaining for months. In these circumstances, when the department has determined there is virtually no safety risk to the officers, the court can safely, and sensibly, remove the temporary stay and the chains. If the union can stop even interim humanity in court, the result is to shackle the Correction Department as well as hospitalized prisoners.
Cardinal O'Connor says he won't allow AIDS education programs in the schools of the New York Archdiocese to include instruction about condoms. A church's teaching is its own business, but doctrine that affects public policy invites public comment. As public policy, the Cardinal's stand is dismaying.  Educating children about AIDS is a hard issue. The Reagan Administration is divided. Secretary of Education William Bennett stresses abstinence and monogamy; Surgeon General Everett Koop urges that children also be taught about the protective value of condoms. Yet even Mr. Bennett, in his handbook for schools, realistically acknowledges that condoms are a second line of defense against disease, should abstinence fail.
So does the United States Catholic Conference, the association of America's Roman Catholic bishops. ''We recognize,'' the bishops said in a policy paper issued last week, ''. . . that some people will not act as they can and should.'' Hence, educational programs about AIDS ''could include accurate information about prophylactic devices.''
As the bishops recognize, some Catholic teen-agers will ignore the church's strictures against premarital sex. Which, then, is better, that they sin with a condom or without? The bishops merely offer the appropriate advice for those who ignore clearly stated doctrine.
Catholics who are ignorant of condoms can become infected or, if they already carry the AIDS virus, spread it to others. Especially in New York, with its heavy burden of AIDS cases, no one can ignore that condoms are among the few practical ways to resist the epidemic.
As a member of the President's Commission on AIDS, Cardinal O'Connor has assumed a duty to the wider public in finding ways to curb the fatal plague. An AIDS education program that does not educate about prophylactics is a prescription for ignorance, disease and death.
To the Editor:
In ''4,000 in U.S. Now Live With Another's Heart'' (Medical Science page, Science Times, Dec. 1), you say that there are at least 12,000 Americans who die each year who might be saved if additional hearts were donated for transplants. Physicians are understandably reluctant to bring up the question of organ donation to a dying patient or grieving family. You mention that there are new state laws requiring doctors to discuss organ donation with patients and families.
But there exists another, and far more effective, option that you do not mention. In France and other European countries, it is assumed that a patient has given permission for organ donation in the event of death, unless he or she has stated otherwise. This system vastly increases the number of organs available for transplant, thus saving many lives, while at the same time respecting the desires of those who, for whatever reason, would prefer not to donate their organs. LAURETTE TUCKERMAN  Austin, Tex., Dec. 12, 1987
Several months ago the General Accounting Office issued a report that makes clear America's failure to take care of its nursing-home elderly. Thanks to legislation signed this week, however, the most helpless of the nation's senior citizens are about to get a better break.
The G.A.O. found that more than a third of nursing homes certified to receive money from Medicare and Medicaid were frequent violators of patient-care rules. The violations ranged from nurse shortages to broken plumbing and bad food: the study makes painful reading.
In a Kansas home, for example, inspectors found that 13 residents had bedsores. Three out of the six patients with feeding tubes were not being fed in accordance with their doctors' orders, and one of them had lost 13 pounds because of the wrong feeding. The study also spoke of ''inadequate nursing services . . . uncontrolled odors . . . improper use of physical restraints.'' Under Federal regulations, however, nursing homes with serious deficiencies could stay in the programs without incurring any penalty if the violations were adequately corrected before expiration of their 12-month provider agreements. That left little incentive for compliance the rest of the year. The only real sanction was loss of certification that, given the national shortage of nursing home beds, is not widely used.
Now, though, the Nursing Home Quality Reform Act of 1987 will make it harder for those nursing homes that are terminated to be readmitted. More important, it expands the authority of both the Department of Health and Human Services and the states to impose lesser penalties like fines and bans on admissions of new Medicare and Medicaid patients.
Nearly $17 billion in Federal funds pour into nursing homes; measures to insure that it is properly spent are prudent, and much more.
For a few weeks earlier this winter I had a chance people in the news business rarely get - to read the newspapers and watch news broadcasts without any sense of urgency, responsibility or competitiveness.
I knew I would be out, convalescing from surgery, for at least three weeks and there wasn't a thing I could do about the news, except to think a little. It was not the sense of remoteness you get on vacation, since I was in New York, and newspapers and magazines were all over the room. It was more like sitting in a stadium, watching the action, which is entirely different from watching the same players from the press box.
Just before I returned to work, I played a little professional game with myself. Among all those thousands of news stories read, what did you really look for, not just come across? What stories did you tear out to keep, make notes to write about someday? Was there a particular field that you wanted to know more about, so you could tell others? (Journalists call events, trivial or historic, ''stories'' because we really are tellers of tales and to us there is no point in knowing or learning if we can't run out and tell somebody. That's just the way we are; go ask a psychiatrist why.) The answer came immediately -not foreign affairs, not the election campaign or the summit meeting, but a story most people still find too unpleasant to talk or think about consistently. AIDS.
And just as quickly I knew why. Partly because it will cause so many hundreds of thousands of deaths -despite what seems to be a new cottage industry of writing which minimizes the worldwide impact of AIDS and preaches that it really is for those others, not us.
But it was also because I knew the AIDS story touched, as very few subjects do, on things important to every one of us: love and sex, fear, religion, law, duty, morality, race, money, politics, compassion, self-protection. It is a story that is everybody's business.
Even though the threat to society is so great - or probably because it is - AIDS not only creates rage against those who have it but bigotry so poisonous that it is positively blinding. Writer after writer in this country denies the possibility that one day we will find the AIDS virus widely transmitted through heterosexual contact, even though they know that is happening in tens of thousands of cases in Africa.
The implication, of course, is that heterosexually transmitted AIDS will somehow remain peculiar to Africans and they will be considerate enough not to travel abroad or sleep with tourists. Then we won't have to worry at all about the disaster of AIDS in Africa; that will be their problem.
AIDS specialists in Europe to whom I have talked see this refusal to recognize at least the possibility of heterosexual transmission on a large scale outside Africa as incomprehensibly stupid.
Headline on an AIDS article: The victims of today will be the victims of tomorrow. Translation: If you are not gay or a junkie and do not make love with them, don't worry.
Let's suppose that is true, which it is not. It simply means that AIDS will more and more become a ghetto disease. Since educated homosexuals are practicing ''safe'' sex, in time all we will have left as victims are poor, ignorant homosexuals and bisexuals and narcotics addicts and their partners; we know who they are, don't we?
Plus, of course, the children of addicts. But kids with AIDS die young so we won't have to worry about their growing up to spread the disease, you see.
We also have gay publications that keep warning homosexuals not to take the HIV test, and print advertisements from prostitutes promising anal intercourse, presumably for gay readers interested in suicide or Russian roulette.
But something aside from bigotry is growing in this country: compassion and the willingness to change.
Homosexuals around the country write letters saying they agree that if they have the virus they may be able to have some forms of sex with unafflicted gay partners but never again anal or oral intercourse.
And young doctors decide to become AIDS specialists. They do it without heroics. They want to make their patients' lives a little better, a little longer, which is what doctors are supposed to do, as they understand it. Perhaps one patient will live to the day of succor.
ON MY MIND
Few Washington feuds rival the war that rages each year between the Office of Management and Budget and the National Institutes of Health. The budget office has opened this season's campaign with an innocent proposal to ''improve'' the institutes' research laboratories through privatization. But the laboratories are not broken, and O.M.B. should look elsewhere to make its fixes.
The cause of the war is the favors that Congress loves to lavish on medical research. Each year it gives more money to the N.I.H. than the President requests. Knowing that, the O.M.B. typically writes a very low figure into the President's budget request. The deans of medical schools and lobbyists for neglected diseases then march on Capitol Hill in an irresistible phalanx, and the N.I.H.'s budget is increased. Last year Mr. Reagan asked $5.1 billion for N.I.H. and was given $6.2 billion.
Hence the O.M.B. has been seeking indirect ways of controlling medical research funding. In the proposal being brewed up this year, Robert Pear reported in The Times, O.M.B. would turn the labs on the N.I.H. campus into a private research center, supported by industry and foundations as well as the Government. Last year N.I.H. spent $650 million on its own labs; the rest went mostly for outside grants to university researchers.
The idea has its virtues, at least on the surface. The N.I.H. has long complained that Federal pay caps prevent it from offering competitive salaries to its top researchers. The agency's protectors in Government consistently seek ''minimal Executive Branch oversight'' over its spending plans, O.M.B. dryly notes. N.I.H. also resents Congressional restrictions on its building plans and financial flexibility. All these impediments to excellence would be removed at a stroke, says the budget office, by privatizing the N.I.H. research campus.
Maybe so, but that would be a drastic remedy for minor vexations. Unlike at universities, N.I.H.'s scientists do full-time research, with no teaching duties. With assured funding, they can risk long- term projects that need not show the quick success necessary to tie down next year's grant money.
The N.I.H. laboratories have a high reputation, most recently vindicated in combating AIDS. Dr. Robert Gallo developed the methods needed to characterize the AIDS virus, and Dr. Samuel Broder identified AZT and related chemicals as promising drugs against AIDS. To convert N.I.H. into yet another laboratory seeking a quick buck from biotechnology would be to subvert a unique and successful institution.
The budget office would do better to ask if the much larger, externally spent part of N.I.H.'s budget is as successful as its in-house research. There's been a steady trickle of fraud in biomedical research, including two notable recent cases among heart researchers.
The O.M.B. has a writ to look into management questions. By developing a yardstick to measure research effectiveness, it could test the efficiency of N.I.H.'s research priorities. That would be more constructive than playing political games.
Governor Cuomo, whose eloquent advocacy of the family of New York has won national attention, now focuses on the children. In his State of the State Message yesterday, he characterized the next 10 years as the Decade of the Child and outlined an ambitious program intended particularly to help the one child in four who grows up in poverty.
It is an urgent, cogent and welcome priority. By articulating it so strongly, Mr. Cuomo - whether or not he has designs on national office - puts children high on the agenda of the nation as well as the state.
Yet the State of the State Message remains an oratorical occasion. What remains to be seen is how much the Governor is willing to spend, in popularity as well as dollars, to make his program for children real.
Early childhood intervention and child care are key elements of the Governor's program to create a fairer chance. He calls for expansion, statewide, of prekindergarten education for 4-year-olds. Nonprofit child care centers would get additional funds. The Governor would expand child care, subsidizing slots for children of working families who are poor. Single mothers receiving public assistance would be trained and licensed to provide child care. The demand for such workers is high, the supply low. This is a way for some welfare mothers eventually to become self-supporting.
The Cuomo program responds to pressing health as well as education needs. Increasingly, premature babies survive, but they are underweight and undernourished - and many remain disadvantaged for life. The Governor calls for expanding prenatal and postnatal care and for much more education in parenting, starting while mother and child are still in the hospital. Importantly, Medicaid eligibility would be extended to 55,000 children who are now without any health insurance, and a new category of health care coverage would be offered to 65,000 children of the working poor.
The program Mr. Cuomo outlined yesterday encompasses New York City teen-agers struggling through schools engulfed in crisis. He has already submitted legislation authorizing a subsidiary of the State Dormitory Authority to build city schools; it takes the inept present system eight years to build a school. And he endorses other sound reforms, like the bill by Assemblyman Jose Serrano of the Bronx to reform the way members are elected to community school boards, and supports Senator Marchi's legislation authorizing a study of school decentralization.
The Governor promises legislation to eliminate a Board of Examiners that now constricts teacher hiring, and says he will move to loosen the custodians' stranglehold over city schools. As for school governance, Mr. Cuomo reaffirms his belief that Mayor Koch ought to have a greater say in selecting members of the Board of Education.
There are other facets to the annual message concerning, notably, housing, transportation and his reluctance to pay for local solid waste management. The Governor's proposals require scrutiny; what can be said now is that these concerns rightly deserve priority attention.
What's most right is Mr. Cuomo's first priority. ''Efforts on behalf of families and children are no longer just a matter of self-interest,'' he said. ''They are a matter of economic survival in the 21st century.'' Mario Cuomo's heart and head are in the right place. The next weeks will tell whether he has the will and skill to move the state, and its children, in the right directions.
Under Stalin, much as in czarist times, a dissenter in the Soviet Union might have been shot in the back of the neck. Under Yuri Andropov's tenure at the K.G.B., the dissenter might instead have been confined to a psychiatric hospital and tortured with psychotropic drugs.
The perversion of psychiatry made Moscow the focus of international outrage, and Soviet authorities now announce new laws designed to curb the abuse. Whether or not the laws truly advance human rights depends on how they are carried out.
The new laws follow a run of stories in the Soviet press about wrongful detention, misuse of drugs and mistreatment in mental hospitals. The statute gives patients or members of their families the right to appeal a diagnosis in court. It also transfers to the Health Ministry the authority for the ''special'' psychiatric units that under the Interior Ministry have been used to confine dissidents.
Much room for skepticism remains. How potent is the right to sue in a system with no separation of powers? As for the transfer of authority, abuses occur in Health Ministry hospitals, too. Infamous statutes on anti-Soviet slander and anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda, commonly used to put political prisoners into ''hospitals'' or behind bars, are still on the books. And the doctors who defined the terms of psychiatric abuse are still in power.
Still, remarkably, the new laws assert that an individual who differs with the state has a right to protection from state power. And they come at a time of changes in practice. Sixty-four political prisoners were released from psychiatric hospitals last year, and there were no new cases of political imprisonment, psychiatric or otherwise.
Instead, Soviet authorities resorted more frequently to brief detentions of those who participated in an increasing number of public demonstrations. Other responses to unrest included fines, counterdemonstrations, many quite brutal, and masses of police to head off protests.
But whether that restraint can continue remains uncertain. Moscow University student protests on behalf of the Moscow Party leader Boris Yeltsin, who was dismissed in November, must have deeply worried authorities, for student unrest is rare. Growing numbers of protests by non-Russian nationalities are equally unsettling.
For now, the new psychiatry laws are one more intriguing step in Mr. Gorbachev's drive for reform. The laws will deserve to be called something more when a political prisoner in a psychiatric hospital brings a lawsuit and wins.
Heroin, a scourge of America's inner cities, is also an extremely effective painkiller that many physicians believe could help desperately ill cancer patients. That's why Senator Daniel Inouye and Representative Henry Waxman are leading an uphill fight to allow treatment of terminal cancer victims with the drug.
In some cases, liberal doses of legal painkillers are sufficient to relieve the severe pain of advanced cancer. But each of the major narcotics has its own pharmacological properties that may produce negative mental or physical side effects. British physicians have long relied on heroin for its high potency and relatively innocuous side effects.
The Compassion Pain Relief Act would allow American physicians to prescribe heroin to the terminally ill in a hospital or a hospice. No institution would be required to cooperate. Without reauthorization, the experiment would expire after five years. Thousands of dying Americans would have a better chance of living their last months lucidly and without agony. Why, then, does Congress resist?
Some physicians argue that equally effective narcotics are currently available, or will be available soon. Some law enforcement officials fear that this legal heroin will escape to the street market.
Neither argument stands scrutiny. No physician would be forced to prescribe heroin, but all ought to welcome another potent analgesic. And the amount to be stockpiled for this limited use would be too small to make much difference in the street supply if some were to leak out.
The real reason for Congressional inaction is bitter opposition of a few, led by Representative Charles Rangel of New York, who sees the bill as the first step to legalizing heroin. Other members better understand the difference between giving heroin to 15-year-old dropouts and prescribing it to patients sentenced to an agonizing death. But they fear being tagged as soft on drugs. How many more Americans must suffer needlessly before Congress discovers its conscience?
Much news about AIDS is grim, but the isolation of a new form of AIDS virus, known as HIV-2, from a woman in Newark is no particular reason for panic. ''New AIDS Bug Perils Blood Banks,'' gasped the hasty tabloid headline. That's just what the virus doesn't do.
The HIV-2 variant of the AIDS virus was discovered three years ago in West Africa. Since its further spread could be only a matter of time, a test for the virus has been developed and can be used to protect the blood supply as soon as that seems necessary.
The Newark AIDS patient from whom HIV-2 was isolated came from West Africa a year ago. The Centers for Disease Control continually checks for the virus's arrival in the United States, but so far has found no case of it among the 20,000 people tested.
There is, in fact, a far more immediate threat to the blood supply in a third virus, HTLV-1. Endemic in Japan, the virus has now been detected by the American Red Cross in 10 out of 40,000 urban blood donors. Since the virus causes leukemia in about 1 percent of those it infects, the time has probably come to screen blood donations, as soon as the tests developed for HTLV-1 are approved.
If HIV-2 is transmitted by the same high-risk behaviors as HIV-1, it will spread among the same risk groups. It seems to cause a similar pattern of disease, and some authorities believe it is less severe than that of HIV-1. But it's hard to make a scary headline out of that.
The Illinois Legislature and Gov. James Thompson have set an inglorious example of what not to do about AIDS. Ignoring the advice of their own and other public health authorities, they enacted a law last year that compels everyone getting married in Illinois to be tested for the AIDS virus. The classic results of this stubborn folly would be ludicrous were it not for the nuisance and dismay inflicted on so many people.
Since Jan. 1, when the law came into effect, the number of marriage applications in Cook County has plummeted 60 percent. The waiting time and cost of the tests - up to $300 - have prompted hundreds of Illinois couples to get married in other states or not to marry at all.
''If we find just 100 people that could have possibly infected another 100 people, it will have been worth it,'' says State Senator Beverly Fawell, sponsor of the Illinois bill. So far not a single applicant has tested positive for the AIDS virus.
That's no surprise. People getting married, who are unlikely to be homosexual or particularly prone to drug abuse, are among the least likely to be infected. In addition, screening a population at low risk for a disease, even with a highly accurate test, produces an unacceptable share of false positives. If Illinois should ever find 100 marriage applicants who test positive by both AIDS tests, perhaps a third of them would have been falsely diagnosed.
Dr. Bernard Turnock, Mr. Thompson's public health chief, said last year that the law would be ineffective and would rob funds from measures that were. Dr. Renslow Sherer, chairman of the Governor's advisory committee on AIDS, warned that it would cause needless anxiety and fear among those wrongly diagnosed. Of the fall in marriage applications, Dr. Sherer now notes that ''one of the chief ways to limit AIDS is faithful monogamy, and here we have a system that discourages that very thing.''
Health officials seeking to control the epidemic have made their practical needs clear. They want voluntary testing of people at high risk. So why do politicians impose mandatory testing of those at low risk? Perhaps because they think it makes them look bold. Instead, the Illinois experience makes Governor Thompson look rash. For him, the best remedy is to admit error and lead the charge for repeal. Other governors can learn from his example.
At a stroke, New Jersey's Supreme Court brought clarity and justice to the Baby M case, which so tormented the nation last spring:
* Mary Beth Whitehead-Gould retains her rights as a parent.
* William Stern and his wife retain the right to raise his child.
* New Jersey acquires a convincing judgment that a ''surrogate parent'' contract for money amounts to an illegal bill of sale for a baby.
The case that had the nation arguing concludes in a way that may not satisfy everyone but sheds powerful light on the vexing questions Baby M provoked.
Mrs. Whitehead-Gould had promised to bear a child for William Stern in exchange for money. But after the little girl's birth, the mother changed her mind, rejected the money and fought to keep her baby.
In supporting her claim to parental rights, New Jersey's high court pointed to the state law that clearly prohibits the use of money in connection with adoptions. Chief Justice Robert Wilentz writes, ''the actions of all three  [ Mr. Stern, Mrs. Whitehead-Gould and the Infertility Center, which acted as broker ]  worked to frustrate the goals of the statute.''
As for the contention that the Sterns were paying only for Mrs. Whitehead-Gould's services, as opposed to her baby, ''we need note only that they would pay nothing in the event the child died before the fourth month of pregnancy, and only $1,000 if the child were stillborn, even though the 'services' had been fully rendered.''
Furthermore, parental rights in New Jersey can be legally terminated only if a parent has been found unfit or if the child has been surrendered to an approved agency. Mrs. Whitehead-Gould, despite being ''harshly judged - both by the trial court and by some of the experts,'' was never found unfit.
''We do not know of, and cannot conceive of, any other case,'' Justice Wilentz continues, ''where a perfectly fit mother was expected to surrender her newly born infant, perhaps forever, and was then told she was a bad mother because she did not.'' Nor did Mrs. Whitehead-Gould ever surrender her child to an appropriate agency. Mrs. Stern's adoption of Melissa, then, was ruled invalid.
The court also found that the Stern/Whitehead surrogacy contract violated longstanding New Jersey policy on child custody, which presumes equal rights of both parents and favors raising of children by their natural parents. The result: ''A child, instead of starting off its life with as much peace and security as possible, finds itself immediately in a tug-of-war between contending mother and father.''
Even so, Melissa will continue to live with her natural father and his wife because, the court says, they promise her the more secure home. Only the issue of Mrs. Whitehead's visitation rights remains; a lower court must decide it within 90 days.
The court found no legal prohibition against voluntary surrogate motherhood, where no money changes hands. But it is unlikely such arrangements will ever be a commonplace: ''It is unlikely that surrogacy will survive without money.'' And it saw right through the claim that surrogacy is a solution to the problem of female infertility: ''We doubt that infertile couples in the low-income bracket will find upper-income surrogates.''
It has long been obvious that ''surrogate'' motherhood has a terrible potential for causing pain. The New Jersey Supreme Court's wise decision may finally relieve some agony for Mrs. Whitehead-Gould and the Sterns. As important, it reinforces sound values for all who aspire to parenthood.
After two years of foot-dragging, Governor Cuomo has taken a small step toward exploring whether sterile needles and syringes might slow the wildfire spread of AIDS among drug addicts. The action, little and late, is nevertheless welcome.
Other countries are well ahead on this road; they wish to save both addicts and the innocents whom they infect. In America, lamentably, politics has turned the issue into a choice between combating AIDS or addiction. Adamant opposition of law enforcement officers has frightened politicians from even testing a clean-for-used needle exchange, as public health officials urge.
The AIDS virus is transmitted between addicts when one uses a needle or syringe contaminated by another's infected blood. In August 1985 David Sencer, then New York City's Health Commissioner, proposed dispensing clean needles to contain the spread. The idea caused an outcry from prosecutors and drug fighters. Making needles unavailable except by prescription has long been a part of the state's unsuccessful anti-drug campaign.
Officials like Sterling Johnson, the city's special narcotics prosecutor, contend that providing clean needles gives official sanction to drug abuse. They also assert that the needles won't be used, even though addicts have now clearly come to fear AIDS and would take steps to protect themselves. Yet drug abuse is an epidemic also, and the drug fighters' concerns about clean needles cannot lightly be dismissed. A pilot project would help assess them.
That's what Dr. Stephen Joseph, Dr. Sencer's successor, proposed in August 1986. David Axelrod, the State Health Commissioner, approved designing an experiment, but somehow the details could never be worked out well enough to satisfy Dr. Axelrod or Governor Cuomo.
While Albany stalled, AIDS raced ahead. Each year another 5 percent of New York City's 200,000 addicts acquire the AIDS virus. That's 10,000 new infections a year, 27 every day. The addicts transmit the virus to their sex partners, and infected women transmit it to their unborn children. The city now expects 1,000 babies to be born infected this year.
Last week, more than two years after Dr. Sencer's proposal and after 20,000 more addicts have become infected, Mr. Cuomo eased off the fence. He let Dr. Axelrod approve the city's plan to give clean syringes and counseling to 200 addicts, and give only counseling to another 200.
The experiment may be too small-scale to show an immediate effect of clean needles in inhibiting infection. But it should quickly establish whether addicts will cooperate in protecting themselves. And law enforcement officials who help in the project will be able to determine if a needle exchange can be handled responsibly.
The results of the experiment are unlikely to be clear-cut but all parties need to recognize the urgencies involved and to come to a decision if at all possible without calling for further experiment.
A needle exchange program, if and when approved, should be part of an intensified larger campaign to reduce addiction, where it would afford a special chance to treat and counsel otherwise unreachable addicts. That's another reason a needle exchange experiment makes sense for all who want to fight both AIDS and drug abuse.
Most of the important news stories journalists deal with are sad or dreary. People are killed, hijacked, swindled. Nations go to war, or spend their energies and fortunes preparing for it. Earthquakes, explosions, plagues. Everybody is always saying something nasty about somebody else. That's the way things are in the world - or that is how it comes out by the time we are finished slicing it up into words or pictures.
But once in a while something happens that sings of creativity or energy or wit or simple goodness and insists on taking hold of us and making us feel happy. A great play opens; that is news and joyous. A country -South Korea, say - lifts itself out of decades of war, rubble and tyranny, builds economic decency and starts building political decency.
One of the happiest stories in decades was the first voyage of man to the moon. How excited we all were in the newsroom, how exhilarated by the realization of man's reach. The only way we knew to express it was to commission a poem, by Archibald MacLeish, and put it on the front page. We even made him stand by at his phone during the night in case the news changed, a task carefully written on the assignment sheet: ''update poem.''
I wish I could write or commission a poem for Chief Justice Robert N. Wilentz and his six colleagues on the Supreme Court of the State of New Jersey. They gave us all some happy news by voting 7 to 0 that mercy, compassion and human dignity are indeed part of the law and must be observed - particularly by judges.
The decision was about paying a woman to bear a child; illegal, they ruled, in the State of New Jersey. It was also about the rights of motherhood. They ruled that no contract could be enforced that deprives a mother of her parental rights, not in New Jersey.
The case, of course, dealt with the child who became known around the world as Baby M. The mother, Mary Beth Whitehead-Gould, signed an agreement under which she would be paid $10,000 to be inseminated artificially with the sperm of Dr. William Stern and bear a child that would be turned over to him and his wife.
When the baby was born, Mrs. Whitehead-Gould changed her mind. She wanted to keep the baby. A lower court judge, whose name is Harvey Sorkow, ruled that a contract was a contract and turned the baby over to Dr. Stern. Then the judge really stuck it to Mary Beth Whitehead-Gould.
In minutes he rammed through an adoption process that usually takes weeks and made Mrs. Stern the legal mother. He ruled that Mary Beth and her baby could never see each other again. He terminated her as a mother, just terminated her.
And then he denounced her as manipulative, aggressive and impulsive. His language shocked laymen and even lawyers wearily accustomed to the cruelty of so many judges toward helpless witnesses and defendants.
The Supreme Court of New Jersey allowed Dr. Stern to keep custody but struck down the attempt by Judge Sorkow to deny the very existence of Mary Beth Whitehead-Gould as a mother. It withdrew recognition of Mrs. Stern as the legal mother and restored it to the woman who bore the baby.
The court ordered hearings held on the mother's visiting privileges - but not by Judge Sorkow. Split custodies are not always healthy for the children, but the court's decision was wise. The Sterns may provide better surroundings than could the natural mother, who has since remarried, but that gives nobody the right to separate mother and child forever. It was an act of judicial anger and vindictiveness to do so in the first place.
Judge Wilentz's court is respected in the country. The decision that surrogacy for money is simply child-sale and therefore illegal will certainly be accepted in many states. Unpaid surrogacy is still legal but there will be little profit in it for the baby brokers, who will have to find a new way of making a dollar.
But the reason the seven judges deserve a poem goes beyond surrogacy. What they really did was rule that a human soul is more important than a contract, that Judge Sorkow's philosophy that a deal is a deal is wrong when the deal involves the selling of a human being. Seven to zero wrong.
And while they were at it, they put in a critical word about the excoriation of the mother by the judge. This should do something for Judge Sorkow's temper, or at least its public display. And it is a reminder to every judge that the people who stand before the bench have a very important thing in common with the person who sits behind it - the right to be treated with dignity and respect.
What rhymes with The Supreme Court of the State of New Jersey?
ON MY MIND
AIDS inflicts suffering on its victims and their families - and unreasonable fear on many people who should know better. The latest to succumb to such fear are New York State court officers and judges, many of whom apparently believe that defendants afflicted with AIDS imperil others in the courtroom.
Instead of standing up for reason, New York's Chief Administrative Judge, Albert Rosenblatt, has issued guidelines that reinforce the paranoia.
At public hearings last August the city's Health Commissioner, Stephen Joseph, pointed out that AIDS is not spread through biting, coughing, sneezing or other casual contact. Nevertheless, the new court guidelines suggest that judges could press defendants with AIDS to waive their right to appear in court - thereby putting fear before justice. When defendants do exercise their right to appear, the guidelines sanction discriminatory treatment and perpetuate wrong-headed beliefs.
For example, Judge Rosenblatt suggests that when accused persons with AIDS are to appear, furniture and other objects should be secured or removed, lest a desperate defendant hurl them about the courtroom. The guidelines also provide that restraining bars be available for violent AIDS defendants. But where is the evidence that these defendants are particularly prone to violence? If such rules are required, let them apply to all defendants.
And the guidelines feed intemperate, ill-founded assumptions about the transmission of AIDS. ''Court officers may guard an afflicted person . . . from a distance up to 10 feet.'' Surgical gloves and masks and plastic shields may be kept on hand but out of sight. Why reinforce misinformation about casual contacts?
Rather than submit to irrational fear, the courts, above all, need to confront it with facts and good judgment. When Judge Rosenblatt's guidelines were issued Jan. 13, the Office of Court Administration pledged to review them periodically. It is not too soon to begin.
Paul Simon, the singer and composer, reasoned that if he couldn't change the world for New York's homeless, he might at least make sure their children got the kind of medical care that most American families take for granted. (About all welfare hotel families can take for granted is a rotten room, a balky elevator, junk food and shouts in the corridor.) That's why today he's the founder and major funder of The New York Childen's Health Project.
Since November, a medical van has been turning up daily at one or another of 12 hotels in which the city houses homeless people. So far its staff, all from New York Hospital, with which the project is affiliated, have seen about 3,000 of the city's 11,000 homeless children.
The van, besides being a doctor's office on wheels, is also an oasis. Clean, bright and cheerful, it is everything that a welfare hotel is not. The first patient one recent afternoon was a two-month-old girl who had already lived in five different places since her birth. Upstairs, her food was kept on the windowsill; and there was no crib or baby bathtub. Even so, her snowsuit was immaculate, and so was she. Other patients included Joelle and her brother Jamil, a bright and funny pair, and Josefina, whose mother would love to enroll her in Head Start but can't because she must spend so much time dealing with her own health problems and welfare red tape.
The curbside van, in other words, brings out of the hotel the more appealing children and the more competent parents. But there are other parents in the hotel -''people in here who use crack and stuff,'' whispers the two-month-old's mother. ''And their babies are dirty.'' Indeed, inside the hotel's lobby a woman takes a vicious swipe at her small son and screams obscenities at her companions. How can their children be assured access to the medical care only a few steps away?
Dr. Irwin Redlener, who helped Mr. Simon develop the project, speaks of ''going from door to door if necessary, no questions asked,'' but even he sometimes fears to go past the lobby of this particular hotel. The fear is justified: a 13-year-old crack dealer was stabbed 14 times and left for dead here a few weeks ago.
Still, Dr. Redlener and his staff are giving thousands of children what may be the first real medical attention they've ever had. They talk of the need for a second van and a jitney for transportation to the hospital. But they also recognize the need to devote more attention to the parents: ''You could spend hours with these families,'' he says. One day they hope to offer psychiatric and drug prevention counseling.
If New York were to produce more people like Paul Simon, that day could come sooner - soon enough, perhaps, to help that bewildered little boy in the lobby and his sick, screaming mother.
Two studies published in The New England Journal of Medicine last week won't help the obese drop any pounds but the research should lift another enormous weight: guilt.
Much of the medical profession, and most of the public, have long assumed that the cause of unhealthy poundage was overeating. ''I just can't seem to help gaining weight'' was simply a weak apology for a lack of self-discipline. The new studies report that the tendency to fat is the result of a low rate of metabolism. The overweight get fat more because their bodies burn calories too slowly than because they eat too much.
As Dr. Jules Hirsch of Rockefeller University wrote in an editorial accompanying the studies, these overweight people are ''born with a handicap.'' Like other handicapped people, he adds, they must learn how to live with and correct for theirs.
That doing so requires a lifelong battle won't come as news to hundreds of thousands of the overweight. But they can take some comfort: they no longer need to battle blame, either from others or themselves.
It is 3:15 in the morning, and I have just been roused out of bed to announce there will be no column in this space today. Since I'm nothing but hired help around here, I keep my thoughts to myself, but that doesn't mean I can't try to put a little fire in the old fellow once in awhile.
''It's 3:15 in the morning,'' I pointed out. ''You've got a touch of the flu, your temperature is 102 degrees and that hideous flannel nightgown you're wearing is steamy with perspiration. No wonder you're depressed. But remember, the show must go on.''
''Why?'' he said, oozing alarming quantities of fluid from his right eye.
''Don't be cranky,'' I said, starting up the word processor. ''Everybody knows the show must go on.''
At this moment he was convulsed with such paroxysms of ague that I wondered if we might be about to lose him. To keep his mind from wandering I said, ''Just because you remember an old Noel Coward comedy song called 'Why Must the Show Go On?' is no reason to believe that Coward ever canceled a show because of a little flu.''
''I don't do shows, I do newspaper columns,'' he said, ''and nobody has ever said, 'The column must go on.' ''
This speech seemed to have exhausted the tiny air supply which, with much wheezing, he was able to get into his lungs, and he collapsed into his armchair and closed his eyes, as if to say, ''Death, where is thy sting?''
''The world must have columns,'' I said, seeing he would be too weak to argue for the next few minutes. ''Gas,'' he gasped. ''Gas?''
''A German Expressionist play. Read in college. By somebody like Hauptmann, titled 'Gas.' Every few minutes somebody says, 'The world must have gas.' ''
There, he was feeling better already. ''Back into bed now,'' I said, ''and in the morning you can write a nice column about German Expressionism.''
''Stuff German Expressionism,'' he rasped.
''Now, now, it won't hurt your reputation to grind out a few highbrow columns. Where would George Will be today if he'd said, 'Stuff the Federalist Papers'?''
The word processor was fully illuminated now, eerie orange letters leaping out of a velvety black background, but still just a television screen. I imagined people responsible for firing nuclear missiles sitting up all over the world at this very hour, staring at television screens.
''Get up in the morning, feeling good, and write a nice column about the irony of using television screens to write with,'' I said.
In reply he coughed loudly, then screamed in pain.
''Aren't we overdramatizing this touch of flu just a bit?'' I said.
''No,'' he said. ''Type out 'There will be no column in this space today,' shut off the machine and go back to bed.''
I said he should expect to scream in pain with every cough. All those muscles around the rib cage, in back of the shoulders and down toward the kidneys were incredibly sore.
That was one of the things a flu virus did, I pointed out, which was really remarkable when you thought how small a flu virus was in comparison with those big muscles in the upper torso.
''Imagine the tiny little flu virus being able to make a big cumbersome fellow like you feel as if he's been severely beaten with baseball bats.''
Sitting in the armchair with eyes closed, he fell silent, and there was no sign of life except the steady flow of fluid from his right eyelid.
''Back into bed now,'' I said. ''Then we'll get up in the morning feeling dandy again and maybe write a nice column about the tiny little flu virus.'' That was the kind of subject they loved to do on ''Nova,'' I said.
''Stuff 'Nova,' '' he said, ''and stuff the tiny little flu virus too. Just write, 'There will be no column in this space today,' turn off the machine and go back to bed.''
He struggled to rise, and after a great deal of painful groaning got upright and tottered back toward the bed.
''Forgot,'' he said. ''I intended to change my will to provide you with a small bequest, but never got around to it.''
Disappointment must have been plain on my face, for he said, ''In case I don't see the dawn, I want you to know I thought of you, even though I didn't get around to writing it into the will.''
The effort of so much speech brought on paroxysms of coughing accompanied by the screams signifying agony in his sore muscles.
I told him I was touched, though long experience with him persuaded me that the bequest would probably have been something like a collection of his 100 favorite columns.
There will be no column in this space today.
OBSERVER
The cover of this week's Newsweek features the rumpled sheets of an empty double bed. That's the teaser for a rumpled, alarming article: it implies that the AIDS virus can be spread by casual contact, declares the risk of being infected by a blood transfusion to be seven times greater than the best current estimates, and warns that the epidemic among heterosexuals ''will now begin to escalate at a frightening pace.''
That none of these assertions is at all probable need be no great surprise. The authors - William Masters, Virginia Johnson and Robert Kolodny -are sex therapists with no particular expertise in the epidemiology of AIDS, and their work has not been reviewed by experts, as is usual in scientific claims.
The authors base their conclusions on a survey in which they found a high prevalence of the AIDS virus in two of four cities. Participants stated they were not gay or addicted, the primary risk groups, but they were not interviewed to verify these assertions. Yet the authors declare, ''The AIDS virus is now running rampant in the heterosexual community.'' A wealth of surveys indicates that's not true.
The authors revive all the old fears about AIDS, while ignoring abundant empirical evidence that has laid them to rest. ''It is theoretically possible to be exposed  [ to the virus ]  in a restaurant under certain circumstances,'' they say in the book from which the Newsweek article was derived. By the same logic, people could be infected in the home, schools or workplace. Yet an abundance of careful evidence shows this doesn't happen.
''Discrimination and paranoia are of course to be deplored,'' say the authors. So are those who invite them without cause.
Before this year is out, women in France, China, Sweden, Britain and the Netherlands will have a safe, nonsurgical way to end a pregnancy in the first three months. Thanks to a noisy minority, however, that option may well remain closed to American women. Unless, that is, some pharmaceutical comapny is willing to brave the boos and threatened boycotts of anti-abortion activists and apply for Government approval to market a drug called RU 486 in the United States.
RU 486 safely terminates pregnancy when administered during the first trimester. It's not the first drug to do that. Prostaglandins, which are made and distributed in the United States by Upjohn, also end pregnancy without surgery or a hospital stay. But prostaglandins produce uncomfortable side effects.
RU 486 will greatly reduce side effects. The drug, expected to be approved for sale in France and China this month and in Sweden, the Netherlands and Britain within the year, may also be useful for treating certain breast cancers and endometriosis, a leading cause of female infertility.
The prospect of such a drug so alarms the anti-abortion movement that Dr. Richard Glasow, of National Right to Life, says his group would organize a vast boycott of any company that made it widely available. So far, such talk appears to have cowed the pharmaceutical industry.
Are the fears justified? Polls show that a large majority of Americans favor the right to choose abortion. In all likelihood, that same majority would favor availability on prescription of a method that is safe, nonsurgical and absolutely private.
Clearly, then, there is an American market for RU 486. Now, where's the marketer?
New Federal dietary guidelines advise Americans who need to limit cholesterol to avoid foods containing highly saturated palm, palm kernel or coconut oils. Pending legislation would make it far easier to follow that advice by requiring package labels to specify the presence of these cheaper tropical oils in processed foods.
The palm and coconut oils from Malaysia and Indonesia are potentially more damaging to cardiovascular health than any animal fat. Palm kernel oil, for example, contains more than twice the saturated fat found in lard. Yet current Food and Drug Administration regulations only require food packagers to list the various oils that might be used in processing, but not to specify which one. This was a concession to food processors who want to switch oils, in order to take advantage of price changes, without having to print new labels.
Past efforts to close this loophole have been defeated by the powerful food producers' lobby. A measure sponsored by Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, and Representative Dan Glickman, Democrat of Kansas, now offers new hope of reform. Endorsed by the American Heart Association and the Center for Science in the Public Interest, it would force manufacturers to specify the use of tropical oils and identify them as saturated fats.
American farmers, producers of unsaturated corn and soybean oil, also support the bill. But the Malaysian Government has joined the opposition, with protests about unfair protectionism. The most important protection involves the health of American consumers.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
Like other states, New York struggles with the problem of opening its Medicaid program to the working poor. Though the Assembly has approved a sensible measure that would do so, the State Senate continues to sit on the proposed Family Access to Health Care Act. Proponents now worry that the bill may be deferred another year or more. That would be a tragedy, not just for the beneficiary families but also for the cause of welfare reform.
Only people on welfare are automatically eligible for Medicaid, Federal health insurance for the poor. Others must meet an income test that, while well intentioned, yields perverse results. One- and two-person households with incomes at or below the Federal poverty line automatically qualify for Medicaid but larger households do not - even though they, too, are poor under Federal standards.
That's because the Medicaid ceiling rises by only $100 for each additional family member. The poverty standard for a seven-person family, for example, is $17,530. But that same family becomes ineligible for Medicaid if its income tops $8,000.
For increasing numbers of people in low-wage jobs that carry no health insurance, this creates a strong incentive to leave the labor force and go on welfare. For those already on welfare it creates an incentive to stay - the cost of an uninsured illness being too great a risk to take. Some 300,000 New Yorkers are caught in this Medicaid eligibility gap. James Tallon, the Assembly majority leader, who pushed the bill through his chamber last year, figures it would cost $93 million annually to close the gap. As with the rest of the $8 billion Medicaid program, this added cost would be shared evenly by Federal, state and local governments.
Senate opposition to the change stems from concern over the added cost to local governments and the need for cost containment in Medicaid. But two-thirds of the extra local cost would be in New York City and much of it would substitute for other public health programs. To the extent the change enables people to get off or stay off welfare, there would also be savings. And if local governments cannot bear the cost, the state can. Nothing prohibits it from picking up the local share.
Cost containment is a legitimate concern, but if accomplished at the expense of a whole class of needy people, it is unjust. It is also foolhardy because of the welfare consequences and because deferred treatment ultimately costs much more than preventive care. This is timely, intelligent legislation, richly deserving Senate approval.
When the issue is a subway token or a movie ticket, having to stand in line is only a bore, and the person who jumps the line is only a nuisance. For the thousands of Americans waiting months, even years, for organ transplants, the wait is a nightmare and line-jumping is a matter of life and death.
Organ transplants are becoming more and more routine; nationally, 924 livers, 1,002 hearts and 8,976 kidneys were transplanted in 1986. That means the line can only grow longer. New proposals from New York State's Task Force on Life and the Law would go a long way toward insuring that nobody in line will lose his place.
Seven state organ procurement agencies currently administer the acquisition and distribution of hearts, livers, kidneys and other organs. Most are affiliated with hospitals that do transplants. As a result, kidneys, for instance, are generally distributed according to the hospital's claims rather than according to how urgently patients need the transplant or how long they have waited.
Furthermore, patients who can afford to consult several doctors are able to get themselves on the waiting lists at several hospitals, thereby multiplying their chances in a way that the less affluent cannot. The same pattern does not hold for heart and liver transplants only because few hospitals in the state do such surgery as yet.
In 1987, 58 heart transplants were performed in New York; and the Health Department recently approved the application of the state's first liver transplant consortium. Kidney transplants, however, number more than 600 a year.
After a two-year study, the task force sensibly proposes that the seven organ procurement agencies be consolidated into three. A single statewide list would govern heart, liver and certain other transplants, while three regional lists would regulate kidney transplants. Once patients were admitted to a transplant program, their place in line would be determined by several criteria, chiefly medical, to be developed by a transplant council.
In making a hitherto fragmented system more orderly, the task force would also make it more fair.
Since 1983, an emergency Federal program has distributed surplus commodities like cheese and dry milk to the hungry. At times, the operation has been sloppily run - but 15 million poor Americans have eaten better because of it.
Those surplus commodities are about to disappear. Hunger, sad to say, is not. All the more reason, then, to strengthen America's long-term food programs now. That is precisely the aim of the proposed Emergency Hunger Relief Act, which is about to come up before a House budget committee. The bill's provisions may sound modest and technical, but they could nevertheless make a big difference in the lives of millions.
By increasing the maximum food stamp benefit by an average of 23 cents per meal, for example, the bill would enable recipients to buy more and better food. By allowing private nonprofit organizations to take over school breakfast and lunch programs during the summer vacation, it would give poor children meals they otherwise go without. By changing the definition of ''household,'' the bill would help alleviate homelessness. Current program rules limiting who may apply for benefits in a household penalize people for taking in homeless relatives.
By restoring funds for outreach activities, the bill would get food stamps to more elderly, disabled and rural poor people. And by maintaining funding for the networks that sprang up to distribute the Federal surplus, the bill would let them continue distributing privately contributed foodstuffs.
If America's war on hunger is to be won, it will be done now by countless, continuing small battles. By supporting the Emergency Hunger Relief Act, Congress will be sending in some much-needed reinforcements.
Governor Cuomo, in his State of the State address this year, argued that New York's economic survival may depend upon guaranteeing its poor children a fair chance. He declared the next 10 years ''The Decade of the Child.'' If the fiscal 1989 budget is any guide, the decade is off to a modest start.
Mr. Cuomo's most dramatic proposal called for ''universal'' pre-kindergarten for 4-year-olds by 1993. The plan was to set up half-day programs in every school district. But half-day preschool doesn't meet working parents' needs. A better plan would provide valuable early childhood education in a full day-care setting. No funds were allocated to universal preschool, but the Legislature added $6 million to an existing program for low-income children.
Day care programs will benefit from a $12 million increase to augment the salaries of day care workers, the first time that state funds have been earmarked for wage increases. Training funds for day care were also provided, as were funds to encourage employers to set up pilot day-care programs. A promising child-care resource and referral network will get an additional $1 million.
The Legislature voted a $9 million increase in nutrition assistance for women, infants and children. But it turned down the Governor's more ambitious plans to extend Medicaid eligibility to 55,000 children now without any health insurance, and to establish a new category of health care coverage for 65,000 children of the working poor. Nor will the state be able to benefit from $45 million in Federal funds for prenatal care. Approval bogged down in disputes over matching cost obligations and use of the money for abortions.
Liberty Scholarships, an ambitious anti-dropout effort, formed the centerpiece of the Governor's education program. Combined with existing assistance, the scholarships would guarantee poor high school graduates four years of higher education at a New York college or university. But the Legislature has not yet gone along with this idea, which would eventually cost about $60 million a year.
Governor Cuomo also promised to come to the aid of the New York City school system. But his legislation authorizing a subsidiary of the State Dormitory Authority to build city schools appears uncertain of passage. So does a bill to eliminate the Board of Examiners, whose requirements now unnecessarily impede recruiting of teachers. The legislators, however, are considering a compromise that should ease teacher recruitment.
The first months of the Decade of the Child, therefore, remain notable more for what has not happened than for what has. That is no doubt inevitable given the steep fiscal implications of some of the Governor's initiatives. But the results so far remain disappointing.
Some in Albany might assume that a campaign intended to last a decade can afford modest results at the outset. Mr. Cuomo at least deserves credit for getting important ideas on the agenda. But while legislators debate, New York's children grow a little older every day.
Pressed by Mayor Koch, New York State mental health officials are finally addressing the overcrowding that has turned emergency rooms in New York City's municipal hospitals into snake pits of despair. Patients - some handcuffed to wheelchairs, others strapped to stretchers - remain in emergency rooms three days or more, awaiting psychiatric beds that don't exist.
The state's plan to tranfer about 200 patients from city psychiatric wards to state facilities will provide some short-term relief. But it won't cure the underlying shortage of outpatient services and residences. Experts, including Richard Surles, Governor Cuomo's new Commissioner of Mental Health, agree such a remedy would sharply reduce the number of costly hospital beds needed.
A lawsuit by the Coalition for the the Homeless puts the issue into sharp relief. The coalition contends that overcrowding prompts hospitals to turn away many patients needing treatment and to release others without adequate discharge planning and aftercare. Some end up living on the streets. The city's lawyers have moved to dismiss the case. But doctors who work in the city's psychiatric wards concede that overcrowding influences decisions whether to admit patients who could benefit from treatment but are not considered dangerous.
The crisis is a grim legacy of the deinstitutionalization that closed upstate hospitals without providing serious alternatives like supervised residences and ''drop-in'' centers offering a meal, a clean bed, counseling and treatment. Traditionally, New York City hospitals have provided acute care. City officials complain with reason that the state, after bungling deinstitutionalization, has reneged on its obligation to provide long-term care.
For starters, the city has a valid claim to more state funds. Until better alternatives are available, the state has a duty to provide adequate space in state facilities.
Accutane is a valuable drug with a horrifying side effect. It's a unique cure for the severest form of acne, but when taken by pregnant women it often causes deformities in the fetus. Use of the drug has been badly mismanaged by its maker, Hoffmann-La Roche, by the Food and Drug Administration and by the doctors who carelessly prescribed it.
This is not a case of weighing benefits against risks. Properly used, Accutane's full benefit can be reaped with very little risk. The only necessary precaution is to insure that the drug is not taken by pregnant women. Yet since 1982, at least 62 children with Accutane birth defects have been born in the U.S. and 6 in Canada, which has a similar regulatory plan. European countries, which from the start placed tighter controls on the drug, have suffered almost no birth defects. Outside North America only three cases have been reported, even though 30 percent of the drug is sold abroad.
Hoffmann-La Roche and the F.D.A. knew from the start that Accutane was likely to cause birth defects. Yet they relied on no more than warning labels and admonitions to doctors. ''You shouldn't have to tell a physician that you have to do a pregnancy test,'' says the company's director of regulatory affairs. ''I don't think anyone could have foreseen what would happen.'' Still, the company required pregnancy tests for patients in pre-market trials, and even so, five became pregnant.
That should have been a warning. No contraceptive is perfectly effective. The more widely Accutane is used, the more birth defects will follow. ''There was a 100 percent certainty that this drug was going to cause human birth defects,'' says Sidney Wolfe of the Health Research Group in Washington. ''Given that, there is no question that the proper precautions were not taken, either in restricting prescription of the drug or insisting on rigorous avoidance of pregnancy.''
Many of those taking Accutane - a recent F.D.A. report estimates 97 percent - can be treated with other drugs. Making sure doctors didn't overprescribe the drug was one obvious precaution the F.D.A. failed to take. Another was insisting that doctors do more to insure that their patients avoid pregnancy, through tests and consent forms.
Instead of starting out with rigorous restrictions on Accutane, to be relaxed in the light of experience, the F.D.A. took the opposite approach. It let Hoffmann-La Roche market the drug with controls that proved too lax, and is only now considering whether to tighten them. The company asserts that more stringent written warnings have greatly reduced birth defects, and says no cases have been reported this year. But Edward Lammer, a birth defects expert at the University of California, says he knows of two deformed children born this year. That's two too many.  Hoffmann-La Roche deserves credit for developing Accutane, a boon for the thousands who suffer the hurt and disfigurement of severe acne. But the company, the F.D.A. and careless dermatologists share the blame for failing to minimize its side effects. Frank Young, the F.D.A.'s commissioner, now has a clear remedial task: Regulate Accutane so that all who need it get it, with no birth defects.
The Federal project to create an implantable artificial heart is dead. During its 24-year life this Dracula of a program sucked $240 million out of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. At long last, the institute has found the resolve to drive a stake through its voracious creation. ''The human body just couldn't seem to tolerate it,'' explains Claude Lenfant, the director of the institute.
Starting with Barney Clark in 1982, artificial hearts have been implanted in four courageous patients in the United States and one abroad. Recipients would become such supermen, the technology's enthusiasts had predicted, that they'd have to be barred from marathon races. But the crude machines, with their noisy pumps, simply wore out the human body and spirit. All patients suffered life of poor quality, often punctuated by strokes or seizures.
Even if the devices had worked acceptably, they would have brought limited benefit to a few at vast cost, just the opposite of what new medical technology should aim to achieve. Research into the life style factors that contribute to heart disease would have been a far more fruitful investment, though less glamorous.
The artificial heart project started at the same time as the Apollo program to land a man on the moon. Unlike Apollo, it veered badly off course. Originally, the heart's energy source was to be a few grams of plutonium. No one cared that recipients would present a radiation hazard unless they wore lead shirts or that the fuel bill for 50,000 such devices a year would be some $2.5 billion.
Even when the plutonium power pack was discarded, the masterminds of this half-baked project forgot to consider the consequences of their technology, like the debilitating psychological effect of being tethered to a grumbling machine. But for a quarter of a century no one could switch the venture off. It took the suffering of five brave patients to make the verdict plain.
The pursuit of the artificial heart has not been completely chimerical. The devices can be of temporary use in patients waiting for a heart transplant. The program has also helped develop mechanisms to assist rather than replace the heart. These already are proving to be of value.  The lesson of the artificial heart is achingly familiar: In medicine, diligent prevention is always better than heroic cure. But try telling that to a Government that would rather develop lung transplants than teach people not to smoke.
Proper clinical testing of blood and tissue samples can provide early detection of cancer, heart disease and other life-threatening ailments. But lax oversight of lab performance has led to a frightening level of inaccuracy. Sound legislation proposed by Representative Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat, would begin to set higher standards for the $20 billion medical testing industry.
According to recent testimony, careless reading of Pap smears often delays the discovery of cervical cancer, resulting in needless deaths. The American College of Pathologists says that 1 of every 10 hospital labs falls below an acceptable level of accuracy for platelet counts, which detect leukemia and bone marrow abnormalities.
The Federal Government now regulates only a tiny fraction of labs - those that do interstate business and those that receive payments from Medicare and Medicaid. New York and a few other states try seriously to police quality. But even New York doesn't cover labs in doctors' offices, where much testing takes place.
Congressman Wyden's bill would impose a uniform Federal standard for lab accuracy. It would also require mandatory proficiency testing and annual inspections. Millions rely on clinical tests; by swiftly approving the Wyden bill, Congress can provide needed reassurance.
The Food and Drug Administration errs seriously in the way it is regulating Accutane, an acne cure that is also a highly potent cause of birth defects. The agency continues to focus on patients' behavior, not that of dermatologists who are overprescribing the drug. The result is avoidable cases of abortion and malformed children.
Accutane is a unique and effective treatment for the severest form of acne. It's safe so long as patients do not become pregnant. Those who do stand a one in four chance of bearing a child with defects like misplaced ears and deformities of the brain and heart. Since 1982, at least 62 such children have been born in the U.S. and 6 in Canada. Yet outside North America, only 3 cases have been reported, even though 30 percent of the drug sales are abroad.
There's no great mystery why. In America, the drug is overprescribed. Instead of reserving it for patients with severe cystic acne, doctors dish it out for milder cases, for which there are other treatments. Some 97 percent of the prescriptions, an F.D.A. report estimates, are unnecessary.
Even when patients try scrupulously to avoid becoming pregnant, contraceptives are not perfectly effective. Clearly the more Accutane is used, the greater is the risk of birth defects. But the F.D.A., dermatologists and the drug's maker, Hoffmann-La Roche, have done little to curb overprescription. Their approach has been to put the burden on the patient, with more emphatic warning leaflets, even though the continuing toll of birth defects shows that warnings are ineffective.
The latest round of restrictions proposed by the F.D.A. is simply more of the same - like requiring that a photograph of a deformed child appear on the warning leaflet and that patients sign an acknowledgment of the risks. These and a program to educate dermatologists will have some long-term effects. But none will quickly remedy overprescription. Nor will they seriously dig into Roche's sales.
Frank Young, the Commissioner of the F.D.A., agrees that previous steps were not as effective as desired but says the new ones ''will resolve the issue as a first step.'' The trouble is that devising an adequate control regime step by step leaves a wake of needlessly deformed infants. The right strategy with a drug known to cause birth defects would be just the reverse: start out with severe restrictions and relax them if justified.
The more Accutane taken by American women of child-bearing age, the more birth defects. The critical control measure is to require doctors to promise in writing that they will prescribe Accutane only for severe, otherwise untreatable acne. But restricting use of the drug is the one step that the agency, Roche and dermatologists still refuse to take. They seem not to have grasped that avoidable birth defects from Accutane are unacceptable.
Some strangled sounds have been emerging recently from the community of academic scientists. They're the noise of errors that no one wants to correct. Scientific leaders, loath to address the causes of poor quality in research, have not seriously begun to develop efficient methods for correcting erroneous claims.
A woman contracted the AIDS virus merely by kissing, a group of researchers reported in 1984. This ominous finding is still being cited as fact, yet the authors have long known it is incorrect. Further tests showed the woman had not been infected after all, Lawrence Altman reported recently in The Times. But it was not until four months ago that the original error was acknowledged, in the footnotes of another scientist's article.
In April, a House committee under John Dingell investigated fraud and misconduct in science, including an article on immunology, published by scientists at M.I.T. and Tufts University, that had been challenged on its reporting of data. A Congressional committee is not the ideal forum to adjudicate scientific claims. Yet the dispute landed there because of repeated failures to resolve it within scientific channels.
Why is it apparently so hard for scientists to retract or modify a published claim? Published papers help secure Federal grants and academic tenure, boons that might be impeded by frequent corrections and retractions. Though more responsible journals try conscientiously to screen out flawed articles, the rejected papers simply get printed elsewhere. To oblige credit-seeking authors, some 40,000 scientific journals are now published. Quantity is routing quality.
Researchers who want to pad their resumes with long lists of mediocre articles can easily evade the present quality control system. For two years Robert Slutsky, a medical researcher at the University of California, San Diego, published papers at the extraordinary rate of one every ten days, many in leading journals. Instead of questioning his remarkable productivity, his colleagues happily shared in the credit by letting him add their names to these works. When it was finally discovered that Mr. Slutsky was reporting data without the tedium of doing experiments, a faculty committee was asked to investigate. ''The academic review process admired quantity at the expense of quality,'' the committee concluded in a 1986 report.
The quality of scientific literature could be improved by some simple expedients. One would be for universities to require researchers to preserve the data on which published articles are based. Surprisingly, this is not current practice. Scientists should be expected to make their data freely available to others, without challenging the seeker's motives or credentials. This hardly revolutionary principle might encourage researchers to report their data objectively.
Journal editors could discourage the widespread and corrosive practice of honorary authorships by requiring each author's contribution to be stated explicitly in a footnote. If journals reserved regular spaces for corrections, like those found in newspapers, statements of error might become less traumatic. Federal agencies could enhance the quality of the scientific literature by reducing indiscriminate subsidies for the printing and purchasing of scientific journals.
Many researchers, with some justice, consider erroneous claims in science to be a trivial issue. Most scientific papers, right or wrong, are quickly forgotten; progress builds only on the best. But without effective quality control or mechanisms for correcting errors, bad science can pollute the good, at least for a time. Congress is puzzled at the persistent trickle of scientific fraud and scientists' insouciance about it. The appearance of infallibility ill befits an enterprise meant to flourish by self-correction.
The $400,000 that a Federal jury awarded Antonio Cipollone in the lung-cancer death of his wife is a drop in the bucket to the Liggett Group. In 1985 the tobacco industry's earnings were a record $3.45 billion. The award is a fraction even of the $2 million that the suit cost Mr. Cipollone's law firm. But this verdict, the first ever to hold a tobacco company liable for injuries to a smoker, may yet become another, historic nail in tobacco's coffin.
Though the industry contends that the relatively small award constitutes a victory, the declines in tobacco stock values yesterday render a different judgment, at least for the moment. And the documents uncovered in the trial put on record an industry attitude toward the risks of tobacco that it would be a kindness to call cynical.
Like a lot of Americans, Rose Cipollone started smoking as a teen-ager. ''I thought that it was cool to smoke and grown up, and I was going to be glamorous or beautiful,'' she said in a deposition a few months before her death. Then, she said, ''I became hooked.'' She contended she was reassured by advertising like ''Play Safe - Smoke Chesterfields.''
Later advertising, such as L&M's ''Just what the doctor ordered,'' convinced her that filter-tips were safer. In 1981 she lost the upper lobe of her right lung to cancer. In 1982 she lost the entire lung. In 1983 she lost an adrenal gland. In 1984, she died. Because Federal warnings first went on cigarette packages in 1966, the jury was allowed to consider Mrs. Cipollone's smoking only until that time. Nevertheless, according to documents uncovered by her husband's lawyers, the tobacco industry knew in the 1940's that smoking was linked to cancer, even while publicly denying it. In 1946, for instance, a letter from a Lorillard chemist revealed the company's awareness that scientists were reporting such links.
In 1961, a consultant to Liggett wrote that ''there are biologically active materials present in cigarette tobacco'' that are ''a) cancer causing, b) cancer promoting, c) poisonous, d) stimulating, pleasurable and flavorful.''
The jury found that Mrs. Cipollone, in refusing to stop smoking, was 80 percent responsible for her own death. But it also found that the company had failed to warn of the health risks before the Federal requirement and that it had misled the public by suggesting that smoking was safe.
The Cipollone case isn't over yet. Liggett plans to appeal; Mr. Cipollone's lawyers plan to ask the judge to overthrow the jury's decision not to award posthumous damages to Mrs. Cipollone. And it's too soon to know whether this verdict is the legal breakthrough tobacco industry opponents have been hoping for, or more proof of the industry's seeming invincibility.
Tobacco industry representatives may well be correct in saying that the relatively small award will ''close the floodgates'' on this kind of litigation. But even if that relatively modest $400,000 doesn't bury this multibillion dollar industry, the moral impact is extraordinary. This case offers a legal X-ray of the tobacco industry's shame; the picture is every bit as devastating as the medical record of Rose Cipollone.
No vaccine or new treatment was promised at the Stockholm scientific conference on AIDS this week. The plague's world toll mounts and newly reported details of the virus's behavior only underscore its insidiousness, like the finding that it can lie hidden for years, beyond the scrutiny of the current antibody tests. Still, the gloom may be the darkness before the dawn.
The first results of a new and more sensitive test, known as the polymerase chain reaction, indicate that some people can acquire the virus at least 18 months before testing positive on the present HIV antibody tests. If widely true, that would surely be troubling. But it will probably turn out to be true of only a tiny minority. There's good reason to assume that most people give a positive HIV antibody test within six weeks of infection. The safety of the blood supply, already high though not absolute, should not be much affected: people in high risk groups are asked not to donate blood.
The real significance of the more refined test is that it will allow more precise mapping of the types of body cells targeted by the AIDS virus. Another announcement at Stockholm, the development of mice that are genetically endowed with the AIDS virus, may sound unexciting, but it at last provides a convenient test animal in which to study the virus's behavior and screen new drugs and vaccines.
Prevention is still the chief weapon against the AIDS virus, and new findings show how it can be used better. The heterosexual spread of the AIDS virus seems to be enhanced by other sexual diseases, especially those that cause sores; a public health campaign against these other, treatable, diseases would guard also against AIDS.
The Stockholm conference brought no news of resounding breakthroughs. But it was full of small advances of the kind that can open the way to bigger ones. The virus's complex biology is being rapidly understood. Each new mechanism of its behavior offers another target that drugs or immunological agents can be designed to attack.
Biologists now command remarkable techniques for probing and manipulating the chemistry of living systems. It's reasonable to assume that sooner or later they will discover a chink in the subtle armor of the AIDS virus. But meanwhile the toll and tragedy mount daily. Better treatments cannot come soon enough. The unwelcome news from Stockholm is that the world must keep waiting.
The nation's diet industry pocketed $50 million last year selling ''all natural'' fiber supplements claimed to promote both slimness and good health. According to the National Cancer Institute, eating more fiber may reduce the risk of colon cancer. Yet most of these costly supplements contain only scant amounts of fiber. The Federal Food and Drug Administration could help consumers by requiring manufacturers to disclose actual fiber content on their packages.
Current labeling practices are misleading. Fibre Trim, the leading brand of supplement, for example, boasts that it contains ''44 percent fiber.'' That sounds impressive. But it's also true that each small pill contains only a third of a gram of fiber - about the same as in a slice of white bread and far short of the recommended daily dosage of 20 to 30 grams.
Because fiber supplements are classified as a food rather than an over-the-counter drug, manufacturers are so far spared having to produce scientific studies to support their extravagant weight-loss claims. But the F.D.A. has an easy way to combat the snake-oil merchants - and to promote sound nutrition generally.
It has the power to update Federal labeling rules to require that all nutrition labels list fiber content in grams, just as riboflavin, niacin and the other substances are now listed.
Interested consumers could then assess the supplements' true value: nearly useless.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
There are few Americans over 20 for whom a childhood trip to the dentist didn't mean a cavity count. But now, the National Institute of Dental Research reports that half the nation's children have no tooth decay whatsoever. The reason: fluoride, once the paranoid's favorite target.
For years, fluoridation of water inflamed substantial parts of the electorate, no matter what the probable health benefits to the public. When a memorable movie madman, the Communist-hating general of 1965's ''Dr. Strangelove,'' described fluoridating water as ''a Red conspiracy . . . to pollute our precious body fluids'' he was speaking for millions.
That fluoride is an accepted part of dental care today is a triumph of reason. So are seat-belt laws, which have prevailed over the illogic of people who think they're some kind of threat to personal freedom. Given how much seat belts have helped reduce automobile fatalities, it's fair to say that anybody who still opposes such laws (18 states don't have them yet) is simply irrational.
The new American wisdom about smoking is a triumph of reason, too, along with the decreasing hysteria about anti-smoking legislation. Reasonable people know that smoking restrictions aren't designed to force a smoker to give up his habit - only to protect a nonsmoker from having to share it.
There are some triumphs of reason yet to come. Millions of Americans are waiting for the day when it is no longer as easy to buy a pistol as it is to buy a radio. Millions are waiting, too, for those who'd keep America's children ignorant of contraception to realize that they're sending kids unarmed into a sexual revolution they didn't make. Those days can't come too soon.
The catastrophic health care bill that President Reagan signed yesterday offers a historic expansion of Medicare - and an equally welcome advance in political maturity.
The bill began with the modest proposal of Health and Human Services Secretary Otis Bowen to patch a hole in Medicare. The Federal health insurance for 32 million elderly does not cover prolonged hospital stays or fully cover big doctor bills. Not many older adults are crushed by uninsured costs but all fear them. The fears could be eased, Dr. Bowen calculated, by charging the 32 million only a few dollars per month.
Once the Reagan Administration had broken the ice, however, Congress plunged in. The final bill adds coverage for hospice care, home health services, mammogram screening and prescription drugs. The legislation adds $4 to the $24.80 monthly premium most people pay on Medicare. It also imposes a ''supplemental premium'' - a 15 percent income tax surcharge, with a cap of $800 per year. By 1993 the $4 would rise to $10.20 and the surcharge to 28 percent with a $1,050 cap.
That's a historic, constructive change. Medicare originated in the 60's as an entitlement available to all. Its backers thought that was the only way to win coverage for the poor. The tax surcharge in the new bill introduces sliding-scale self-insurance: the affluent pay more. To some extent that was forced by the politics of deficits. But the new financing also signifies welcome sophistication. Congress's enthusiastic acceptance of the idea bodes well for two other issues. Insuring the uninsured. About 37 million people, mostly working poor, earn too much to be eligible for Medicaid insurance for the needy but aren't covered by their employers. Yet requiring employers to insure them could create an impossible burden for smaller businesses. Massachusetts is experimenting with a plan that gives employers incentives to insure and partially subsidizes premiums for those who remain uncovered.
Uwe Reinhardt, the Princeton University authority on health care finance, argues for a different approach: Spread the cost to society as a whole, creating a Federal safety net, but limit patients to cost-efficient health maintenance organizations. Long-term care. Nursing home costs could exceed $120 billion a year by early in the next century. Private insurers are finally experimenting with policies that offer substantial coverage at reasonable rates for those willing to start contributing while still in midlife. But a recent Brookings Institution study argues that a tax-financed public insurance program is inevitable on some scale, affordable if the cost is spread to Americans of all ages.
These problems are more urgent than catastrophic care. Yet Washington, deeply in deficit, only frets. The new Medicare achievement eases the individual's fear of ruinous medical expense -and the wider fear that on issues like these, Congress could never budge.
With the publication of the anonymous article ''It's Over, Debbie,'' the Journal of the American Medical Association brought to public consciousness the issue of euthanasia and the physician's role in it.
Although mercy killing was widely denounced at the time, there was little discussion of the physician's ethical problems. And there is nothing to suggest that the resident who administered the lethal dose of morphine to Debbie had been educated to think carefully about ethical responsibilities to his patient.
When I began medical school in the fall, a course titled ''Physician's Responsibility'' was making its debut in the first-year curriculum. Students speculated that it must deal with malpractice, but the course actually concerned medical ethics. If the word ''responsibility'' for physicians conjures up the idea of legal liability before it implies moral accountability, is it any wonder that ethical issues are not viewed as an integral part of the process of becoming a doctor?
Almost daily, popular media articles describe medicine's advances -heart transplants, in vitro fertilization and various life-saving procedures made possible by technological prowess. Each advance poses new questions. Who should get heart transplants? Who should pay? When should a technologically dazzling life-prolonging maneuver be ended? Who should decide?
Studying ethics cannot guarantee that we will practice ethically, but it is a first step. In our class, we considered problems ranging from doctor-patient confidentiality to whether health care is a universal ''right'' to cost containment. We focused on establishing a relationship in which the patient and doctor are moral equals. We considered the importance of different and often contradictory viewpoints: the patient's, the physician's, the hospital's and the family's.
When I face my first breast-cancer patient, I already will have thought about the controversy over treatment. I will be aware that I can be paternalistic, cloaking my own uncertainty, or be straightforward, burdening my patient with uncertainty but giving her a choice.
About 100 medical schools offer ethics courses, but they are considered interesting extracurricular topics rather than courses as vital to a doctor's education as biochemistry or physiology. If ethical considerations were made mandatory, we would be a step further along in rehumanizing medicine.
Ethical issues not only make us aware of specific problems, but also develop our ability to reason in a way that rote memorization, so prevalent in medical school, does not. Our ethics class was a seminar in which each student was to consider and defend his or her position. In the beginning, many of us were reluctant to take a stand or give the ''wrong'' answer. But sometimes there are no right answers, just better or worse answers, and the better answers may only become obvious on reflection.
Of course, a strong knowledge of scientific data is crucial, but it's equally necessary to be able to question scientific ''facts'' if they don't neatly fit a specific case. Doctors should be thoughtful and inquisitive health care providers, not simply highly skilled technicians. More students might become caring practitioners if foundations in ethical reasoning were laid down in the four years during which we make that mysterious transition from student to doctor.
''Being called America's foremost socialist,'' William F. Buckley Jr. once commented, ''is like being the tallest building in Topeka, Kansas.'' Yet Michael Harrington's eloquent writings and lifelong passion for justice have earned him stature and respect extending well beyond his socialist base. Now battling cancer, Mr. Harrington was honored last week at a New York City testimonial, with Senator Edward Kennedy giving the keynote address.
A practical idealist, Mr. Harrington has magnified his influence by working within the Democratic Party. He has advised labor leaders and politicians and organized coalitions to press the concerns of minorities and women. Speaking at hundreds of campuses over the years, he's inspired young people to become more politically involved.
Mr. Harrington's 15th book, an autobiography, has just been published. But he'll always be best known as the author of ''The Other America.'' That 1962 volume awakened the nation to the ''invisible poor'' and helped inspire the War on Poverty.
''The problem,'' Mr. Harrington wrote, ''is to a great extent one of vision. The nation of the well-off must be able to see through the wall of affluence and recognize the alien citizens on the other side.'' A quarter of a century later, the words resound.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
Few people would advocate solving the drug problem by killing addicts. Yet that's the effect of the drug policy now pursued by Mayor Koch and Governor Cuomo. By resisting measures to halt transmission of the AIDS virus among addicts, they are letting the infection spread. That does not eliminate drug abuse, only drug abusers.
New York City has about 200,000 addicts, some 60 percent of whom now carry the AIDS virus. Among the rest, some 6 percent become infected each year - about 5,000 people. Many acquire the virus through sharing needles and syringes, a practice encouraged by the New York State law that prohibits sale of such equipment.
Many of these 5,000 might be protected if they could exchange used needles and syringes for sterile ones. In the Netherlands, more than 70 percent of Amsterdam's addicts are participating in a needle-exchange program. Among addicts in a Swedish program, the rate of new infections has dropped close to zero. Needle exchanges are a unique way of reaching and counseling addicts, many of whom would not seek treatment even if it were available.
New York refuses to offer clean needles to addicts because of vociferous resistance from officials responsible for combating drugs. They abhor giving any kind of sanction to drug abuse and argue that making needles available would enhance it. These are reasonable objections in theory. But there's no empirical evidence that needle exchange increases drug abuse. On the contrary; Amsterdam's experience suggests that it does not.
The heavy toll of AIDS by now outweighs the hypothetical risks of a clean-needle program. In neglecting an opportunity to halt transmission, New York's authorities assume a heavy burden of consequences. Apart from keeping addicts alive, clean needles could spare the innocents whom the addicts infect - their partners and children. The addicts and their partners are also a source from which AIDS may spread to the wider population.
Other cities have taken some first steps. The District of Columbia is providing addicts with vials of bleach to sterilize needles. This month, Oregon began a pilot project to give needles to 125 addicts in Portland. But through the inaction of Mayor Koch and Governor Cuomo, New York has done almost nothing. David Sencer, then the city's Health Commissioner, proposed in August 1985 that addicts be given a clean needle for each dirty one turned in. Three years later, a small-scale exchange experiment has been approved, in principle, but has still not begun.
Even if the pilot project gets under way, it will take months before opponents can be placated and a citywide program put into effect. Stephen Joseph, the city's Health Commissioner, offers a grim summary: ''We have lost so much time, and an enormous number of lives.''
To the Editor:
Rena Kunis's argument that government should keep out of surrogacy (letter, June 13) contains a number of false assumptions in its concluding sentence, ''When two consenting adults enter into an agreement that harms no one and, indeed, benefits all concerned, the principles of democracy demand that the Government keep its nose out of their business.''
Many have questioned the surrogate's ability to give truly informed consent to an agreement to give up a child she has not yet conceived. One surrogate, Elizabeth Kane (pseudonym), wrote recently that she had little reason to anticipate the remorse she felt after relinquishing the contracted-for child as she had previously without regret given up for adoption a child born out of wedlock.
The Stern-Whitehead dispute clearly demonstrates that surrogacy agreements can do much harm to all involved when one or another party is unable or unwilling to fulfill the terms of the contract. Even when all goes according to plan, there may be psychological harm to the surrogate, the child, the custodial parents and the surrogate's other children, to name only the most obvious victims.
It is probably too early to assess the full extent of the harm that will be suffered by the children born as a result of such agreements, as the oldest is not yet a teen-ager. That a number of surrogates have been psychologically harmed by their experience is shown by their forming the National Coalition Against Surrogacy, to lobby for legislation to ban surrogacy.
Government becomes involved of necessity when surrogacy agreements go awry and a court must determine who will get custody of the child. Government is also rightfully involved when people engage in practices harmful to themselves and others, especially when the others include children. One of the principles of our democracy is that government has the power to act for the protection of children when the adults who should be safeguarding their interests fail to act responsibly. SHEILA TAUB  Professor of Law, Univ. of Bridgeport  Bridgeport, Conn., June 29, 1988
Investigators have not yet found the specific sources of hypodermic needles, blood vials and other medical waste rolling in with the tides on Northeast beaches. But controlling the problem poses no mystery at all.
Hospitals, clinics, laboratories and nursing homes across New York State generate about 125 tons of infectious waste each day - a tiny portion of the 48,000 tons from all sources. State law mandates that the infectious matter be segregated in red bags and burned and that hospitals dispose of half the total in their own incinerators. To get rid of the rest, they contract with private firms.
It's unlikely that many hospitals, labs or clinics knowingly seek to evade the law. But some surely are tempted by low bids from unscrupulous carters who dump the red bags in the water and pocket the incineration fee. Some waste may not even get as far as the ocean. Last year, Brooklyn District Attorney Elizabeth Holtzman indicted Energy Combustion Corporation of Long Island for allegedly covering up the illegal dumping of 1,400 red bags found in a Brooklyn warehouse.
A serviceable model for stronger control of the carters exists in laws designed to curb the ''midnight dumping'' of toxic chemical wastes. In addition to establishing stiff penalties for violations, they require record-keeping to create a paper trail from waste producer to disposal site.
While medical pollution has turned up before, the issue lacked political weight until this month, when the needles and blood vials prompted anxious health officials to order beach closings in the middle of the marathon heat wave.
Now Senators Moynihan and D'Amato of New York and Bradley and Lautenberg of New Jersey are sponsoring legislation calling on the E.P.A. to establish a pilot waste-tracking program in the Northeast. Governor Cuomo, meanwhile, wants the Legislature to upgrade to a felony the dumping of even small amounts of infectious waste.
He also has found $2 million in the state budget for more rigorous enforcement of infectious waste laws and has ordered state agencies to develop a tracking system. Ultimately, the private carters might be relieved entirely of their role with the construction of more hospital incinerators.
In an era of disappearing landfills and homeless garbage barges, it's tempting simply to accept medical waste on the beaches as one more dismal side effect of modern life. That's nonsense: the quantity is manageable and safe incineration feasible. Open beaches require no more than common sense and political will.
New York City is home to many of the world's best hospitals and physicians. But in an emergency, their ability to help may depend entirely on how rapidly city ambulances respond. Deaths caused by ambulance delays are intolerable - the more so because firefighters are already deployed and ready to help.
Since 1970, the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation has operated the Emergency Medical Service to respond to ambulance calls citywide. While the service has shown some general improvement over the years, this summer has seen a number of inexcusable lapses. The Koch administration attributed the latest tragedy to a dispatcher's failure to send an available ambulance. A man with massive internal bleeding died because the E.M.S. was slow to arrive.
City Council President Andrew Stein charges that the service is hopelessly mismanaged and demands that its managers be dismissed. City Hall admits to a serious maintenance problem. At any given time, a third or more of the ambulances are out of commission. Officials blame the hot weather for the breakdowns. They say they are calling in Sanitation Department mechanics to help out, and have ordered new ambulances.
Those are lame responses. Mr. Stein offers a much more sensible idea: Empower the Fire Department to respond to life-threatening medical emergencies. Firefighters trained to perform cardio-pulmonary resuscitation are on duty at 223 firehouses throughout the city. They respond to most alarms in about four and a half minutes - fast enough in some cases to prevent irreversible brain damage in patients stricken by cardiac arrest.
In contrast, the E.M.S. responds within six minutes in only 40 percent of cardiac arrest cases. Every day there are about 90 such calls. Besides, given a declining number of fires, there is firefighter manpower to spare. Many big cities have long employed firefighters for emergency medical response.
With Mr. Stein's prodding, the city now grudgingly agrees to try out firefighters as ''first responders'' in cardiac arrest and choking cases in the South Bronx. But even this limited pilot program may not begin until January. Why the hesitation? Though virtually all firefighters have been trained in resuscitation, many will need retraining, and the agencies will have to work out interaction. But these aren't insurmountable problems.
If firefighters are brought in, lives can be saved. If not, they will be lost and the Mayor's office will share in the blame.
''There can no longer be any doubt about the link between diet and disease,'' Surgeon General C. Everett Koop said last week upon release of his encyclopedic ''Report on Nutrition and Health,'' which urged drastic overhaul of America's high-fat diet. But why doesn't Dr. Koop link that authoritative advice to a call for more stringent food labeling rules?
For fans of hamburgers, french fries and ice cream, the 712-page tome contains only bad news. Citing hundreds of studies, the report presents compelling evidence that a fatty, high-calorie diet increases the risk of coronary heart disease, stroke, obesity, high blood pressure and some forms of cancer. Despite growing public awareness of the danger, most Americans still exceed acceptable levels of saturated fat and cholesterol.
Reducing fat intake, Dr. Koop reasonably concludes, ought to be the nation's highest dietary priority. But telling Americans to avoid pervasive artery-clogging ingredients like palm or coconut oil is nearly useless when most processed food labels disguise their presence.
The Federal Government can't give citizens the willpower necessary to resist a tempting piece of chocolate cake. What it can do is give them the data to make informed choices.
Yet the Reagan Food and Drug Administration has turned aside appeals from health and consumer groups to require full disclosure. Disappointingly, Dr. Koop's report calls only for voluntary improvements in food labeling, a meek approach the American Heart Association rightly rejects.
Sensible bills now pending in Congress would require food manufacturers to specify fat, cholesterol and fiber content on all package labels. The dietary information amassed in the Koop report offers powerful arguments for the bills. Dr. Koop ought to be in the vanguard of those campaigning to enact them.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
Remember the old-time snake oil pitchmen who huckstered Colonel Goodbody's Magic Elixir? Their direct descendants are many of today's medical equipment salesmen, who peddle useless and expensive gizmos to the nation's unsuspecting senior citizens - harvesting millions in Medicare profits.
Here's how the scam works: At homes or unaware senior citizen centers, a smiling flimflam man arrives with a licensed doctor in tow. They offer free medical check-ups to senior citizens that last a scant few minutes. Unsurprisingly, every ''diagnosis'' discovers minor ailments associated with advancing age. It just so happens that the duo can recommend the perfect remedy: one of the items they sell. ''Sign here,'' they urge, ''It's free.''
A person's health is the the last concern of these charlatans. Obtaining Medicare authorization signatures is their paramount objective. That signature amounts to a blank check for raiding the billion-dollar Medicare vault. Thanks to their smooth-talking confidence men, medical equipment companies bank huge profits by hoodwinking senior citizens.
Consider a transcutaneous electric nerve stimulator, known as a ''tens'' unit. When introduced on the market about four years ago, it cost approximately $300 to make. Its price - like that of other electronic goods - has dramatically dropped. It now costs $72.25, yet Medicare's reimbursement rate remains $562.40, leaving the supplier a tidy $490.15 profit - a mark-up of more than 600 percent.
Or how about a hemaflow pump, prescribed for circulatory ailments? It, too, has become cheaper and currently wholesales for $248. Medicare's reimbursement is $780, netting a bottom line bonanza of $542. Pretty good work if you can get it!
In New York City last year, Shirley Brockway, director of the Jewish Association for Services for the Aged, sounded an alarm when 84-year-old Louise Belfiglio complained that she had been notified by Medicare it had paid $1,278 for equipment she never received. During the ''exam'' given to her by visiting salesmen, Ms. Belfiglio smelled a rat and threw the team out of her apartment. But that didn't stop them from filing false claims to Medicare and, more remarkably, getting the company reimbursed.
In another case, Gertrude Delgado, 74, innocently signed a paper and began receiving medical equipment she never ordered. She asked Medicare to have the shipments stopped, but the agency blithely went ahead and shelled out $1,515.
A review of 300 cases showed that on average each senior citizen's unwitting authorization translates into $1,200 to $2,100 in Medicare reimbursements. In virtually every case, the equipment is unwanted, unneeded, unsolicited and, often, unsafe. Almost all of it remains unused, collecting dust in a closet.
One firm, formerly the largest durable medical equipment supplier in the nation, was Electro Therapeutics Inc. In 1986, it was reimbursed $7.7 million by Medicare in New York State alone, solely for devices primarily marketed to senior citizens. While investigative pressures from the Federal Bureau of Investigation forced it to close down, investigations by my office suggest some of its former personnel continue plying the same wares under different corporate letterheads. Medicare's automatic money machine, never out of order, remains too tempting to ignore.
Medicare should take the following steps immediately to stop the rip-offs. It must upgrade its oversight of medical equipment marketers and alert senior citizens and their support groups to the ongoing fraud. It must better scrutinize reimbursement claims and reduce profit gouging by bringing reimbursements in line with market prices. It should put reimbursements in escrow when a supplier's practices become suspect.
Under current law, senior citizens must be billed 20 percent of the costs of medical equipment, but reimbursements from Medicare are so lucrative that suppliers waive that 20 percent just to keep their foot in the door. While senior citizens should not pay for equipment they were fooled into ordering, enforcing mandatory billing is one of the best ways to track down predators. Enforced billings would deprive shady salesmen of their most alluring pitch - ''it's free'' - and alert senior citizens and Medicare officials to the scam.
But the reform most urgently needed is an end to Medicare's shocking, shoulder-shrugging indifference. Their lack of zeal in attacking fraud and waste only encourages predatory practices. The flimflam men are convinced no one cares where the millions go. Unless Medicare officials change their attitude, nobody else will.
Did Gov. Michael Dukakis ever seek psychiatric treatment? No, he says, and President Reagan's snickers notwithstanding, there's no reason to doubt him.
But what if he had done so? What if, in grief over a brother's death or distress over losing a hard-fought election, Mr. Dukakis had consulted a psychotherapist? What on earth would have been wrong with that? Nothing. On the contrary, it would have reflected healthy common sense, no more disqualifying for public office than a divorce, gender, race or the ''wrong'' religion.
Indeed, this episode, for all the swirl of dubious rumors, might yet produce a redeeming result: to break the psychology barrier in American politics.
Mr. Dukakis could hardly be blamed for being sensitive on this subject. It was only 16 years ago, after all, that the revelation that Senator Thomas Eagleton of Missouri had undergone electroshock therapy for depression cost him the Vice-Presidential spot on the Democratic ticket. It is not at all clear just how mature the American electorate has become on this issue.
Not very, President Reagan obviously feels. His mean-spirited gibe Wednesday at Mr. Dukakis's expense (''Look, I'm not going to pick on an invalid'') reflected his own lowbrow attitude - and his equally low estimate of the public's sensitivity. Yet Mr. Reagan is Exhibit A of the American public's ability to conquer prejudices.
Ronald Reagan is the first divorced person to win the Presidency. A generation ago, a divorce would have been an automatic disqualifier. So, once, was Roman Catholicism, but the American people overcame that barrier by electing John F. Kennedy in 1960. In 1984, Geraldine Ferraro's Vice-Presidential candidacy broke the gender barrier, and this year, in a development that would have been unthinkable even a dozen years ago, a black man, Jesse Jackson, ran strongly and credibly for the Democratic nomination.
Are the American people equally willing thus to abandon prejudice when it comes to psychology and psychotherapy? According to the National Institute of Mental Health, 15.5 million Americans a year get therapeutic care. The American Psychological Association estimates that a third of American families have at least one member who is or has been in psychiatric care. Almost everyone knows someone who has benefited from therapy.
Michael Dukakis says he relies on his family for stability and support, and it is his good fortune to be able to do so. But it would have been no disgrace if he had sought psychiatric help - as it is no disgrace to the millions of Americans who have done so. Mental health may still be a coarse laughing matter to President Reagan. To millions of his fellow citizens, it's time at last to break the psychology barrier.
As the flap over Gov. Michael S. Dukakis's mental health indicates, we have created an impossible situation for our political leaders, a situation that undermines both them and the quality of our political life. Few ambitious politicians now dare seek out professional help for psychological, marital, alcohol or drug problems for fear they will be labeled ''mentally unbalanced.''
A major problem is that both the press and politicians seem to assume that the public will not tolerate leaders who have had psychotherapy. Although probably more than one-third of the electorate has seen a psychotherapist at one time, the press and politicians hound the seeker of therapy out of the political process without giving the electorate a chance to vote. Voters may be more sophisticated than either the press or the politicians suspect.
As things stand now, however, the former Presidential candidate Bruce Babbitt may have been right when he said, ''My advice to politicians, from the third grade on is: Don't go near a psychiatrist. It's the kiss of death.''
It may be. Consider what has happened to other aspirants for high office who have submitted to the politically deadly, if often emotionally healing, ''kiss'' of therapeutic help.
The most vivid instance was, of course, when reporters for Knight-Ridder uncovered evidence of the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee Thomas F. Eagleton's hospitalization for depression.
I was the questioner who, as a reporter for The Los Angeles Times, asked Senator Eagleton whether he had undergone electroshock treatment. At that fateful press conference on July 25, 1972, his reply was that he had been given electroshock several years earlier. It drove a final nail in the coffin for his quest for high national office.
Given the circumstances, I would probably ask that question again, but I wish news organizations would do much more to put such stories in rational context than they did in 1972 or do today.
Many psychiatrists still think electroshock is the best treatment for some forms of depression. While Senator Eagleton's problems and his reluctance to disclose them may well have warranted forcing him off the path to the Vice Presidency, the press might also have commended him for having the wisdom to seek treatment.
Most of the psychiatric help sought by politicians is not nearly so major as that required by Senator Eagleton. Indeed, some psychological problems have little more public significance than an ingrown toenail.
Most Americans would have faulted President Reagan if he had failed to seek professional help for malignant skin growths, no matter how minor. And many voters could certainly contemplate the possibility that they might need psychological help in a divorce or after the loss of a spouse, child, brother or job. What, then, is so different about politicians?
Our unwillingness to consider that politicians also need psychological help stems from a misunderstanding of leadership. Much as we may hate to realize it, our leaders are people much like ourselves. Just as we know they have the same physical frailties that we do, we should understand they, too, have similar emotional problems. There are no supermen or superwomen to lead us.
Governor Dukakis is not the first Presidential candidate who has faced - and denied - stories of psychiatric treatment. Such rumors were whispered about President Nixon. But how much difference does it make if President Nixon or President Reagan or any other Presidential candidate has ever seen a psychiatrist?
It could be easily argued that President Nixon, or any President who had received psychotherapy, might have been better able to deal with the complex problems of perceiving reality that any President faces. Even the patron saint of Presidents, Abraham Lincoln - an often-depressed man -might well have benefitted from sophisticated psychological help if it had been available in his time.
Some argue that we need to know everything about the man who has his finger on the nuclear ''trigger.'' We need to know a lot about a President, but the standard of knowing everything will soon mean unreasonable demands at every level.
Therapists often say that most people need outside psychological help to break the chain of addiction. Does every mayoral candidate who has gone to Alcoholics Anonymous, or every Congressional candidate who has seen a therapist to conquer a drug dependency, or every parent running for governor who sought family counseling have an automatic obligation to reveal all?
During an interview about why it is so difficult to persuade politicians to get treatment for chemical dependency, a Congressman told me with striking poignancy that ''any time a member of Congress seeks medical assistance, whether for alcoholism, psychiatry or whatever, it gets printed in the press. The Congressman doesn't want to get branded, so he stays in a closet.''
When it was revealed years later that this very Congressman's career had been curtailed by drug dependency accusations, the reason for his poignant tone became clear.
Journalists have an obligation to reconsider whether we need to print and broadcast absolutely everything anyone knows about candidates and re-evaluate whether we are educating citizens about the relative severity of psychological problems.
Voters, and politicans too, should reconsider why some think that seeing a mental health professional invalidates a person's suitability for high office. If we cannot change our views and methods, we will continue to discourage many able people from running for political office and will frighten politicians from seeking the help that so many of us sometimes need.
National health insurance: for 40 years the words have meant politically impossible, utopian. Now, perhaps, this idea's time has come. The plight of the uninsured was a recurrent theme at the Democratic Convention, and Michael Dukakis has committed himself to ''basic health insurance for every American.'' George Bush and the Republicans have not yet been heard from, but even Congressional conservatives acknowledge that something must be done for the uninsured.
The most sensible solution would be a national one - a truly national program in which costs are shared by all and not simply dumped on employers.
The number of people without health coverage, which is growing by a million a year, currently totals 37 million, one American in six. Medicaid, the Federal-state insurance program for poor people, now covers only 40 percent of them. In New York, families earning much less than the poverty level are ineligible; the only sure way to qualify is to be on welfare. Two-thirds of the uninsured are working poor - their employers don't offer insurance or they earn too little to buy it on the open market.
Senator Edward Kennedy, a longtime champion of wider coverage, now proposes the Minimum Health Benefits for All Workers Act. It would require every employer to offer basic health insurance, covering dependents, to every employee who works more than half time. This would cover 24 million people.
But this approach could also impose ruinous increases in labor costs on small businesses and create pressure to eliminate jobs for many of the very people it intends to help. And the bill offers nothing for the 12 million others, uninsured and unemployed.
There's a fuller, fairer way - a national system that covers all the uninsured and spreads the costs, instead of loading them on business. Senator Kennedy attempted this comprehensive approach in 1977. Then, it was assuredly utopian; it drew all of nine co-sponsors. His current proposal is no retreat from principle, but a practical effort to achieve the achievable now. Legislation to expand employment-based health coverage now seems practical; any new program requiring substantial Federal spending seems much less so, given the Federal budget deficits.
Even so, for Congress the choice is not between something and nothing. The choice is between billions spent wisely and billions spent less wisely; between best, a comprehensive approach, and second-best, a piecemeal one.
In one way or another, society eventually pays for medical care of most of the uninsured. The issue is how to do it most sensibly and efficiently. According to one recent study, a million Americans a year are denied routine health care for want of the means to pay, and 14 million more don't seek care because they know they can't afford it. Most such people finally become so sick and desperate that they show up in emergency rooms.
Hospitals cannot swallow the cost of treating them; they pass it on in higher charges. Indeed, these are then much higher charges because such treatment invariably is more complicated and expensive than if the poor patient had routine access to preventive care.
America may well be ready for a rational, national system. The Princeton economist Uwe Reinhardt argues cogently for one approach: spreading costs of indigent health coverage to society as a whole but requiring patients to use cost-effective health maintenance organizations. Every taxpayer would be required to provide, along with his tax returns, evidence of some minimal level of health insurance. A dedicated tax of 1 or 2 percent of adjusted gross income would be collected from everyone to provide coverage for the indigent.
Michael Dukakis earlier this year won approval for an employer-based universal health insurance plan in Massachusetts very similar to the Kennedy proposal. And he has already committed himself to press for the Kennedy Minimum Health Benefits bill if he is elected.
The best argument for that approach is familiar: that to do more remains utopian, politically unattainable. Perhaps, but why surrender in advance?
The National School Lunch program has taken a few knocks from the Reagan Administration, but none as hard as handed out by the Marriott Corporation. Marriott, which owns the Roy Rogers fast food chain, thought to boost burger sales with a TV commercial that pokes fun at school lunchrooms. To the accompaniment of a tune, ''See You in September,'' actors dressed as cafeteria workers proffer trays of unattractive food to the camera.
The school lunch program, while not perfect, has fed millions of schoolchildren free or subsidized lunches for more than 40 years. In New York City, where the school system serves 675,000 meals a day, 80 percent of the children who receive them are from families too poor to pay. For Marriott to praise junk food at the expense of nutritious school fare isn't just unfunny. It is cruel to kids for whom that meal may be the best they get all day, and demeaning to those who prepare it.
Marriott now promises to withdraw the ad ''as soon as we can.'' Soon can't come too soon.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
At the turn of the century, most pregnant women saw the doctor only when the pregnancy was confirmed and when the baby was delivered. That pattern still prevails for thousands - among industrialized nations, the United States ranks an ignominious 19 in preventing infant deaths.
The National Commission to Prevent Infant Mortality, after a yearlong study, spells out reasons that 40,000 American babies a year don't reach their first birthday. Many are born too soon and many too small for lack of decent prenatal care.
How can the public sector improve life chances for poor children? The Commission would like to see the Medicaid program expanded to cover all pregnant women and infants less than a year old whose family incomes are less than twice the Federal poverty level.
How can the private sector help the millions of women of childbearing age whose families' health insurance doesn't cover maternity care? Simple, the Commission says. Remove the provision of the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978 that exempts employers with 15 or fewer employees from having to include maternity coverage in their private health plans.
But expanding Medicaid coverage won't work unless there's a corresponding expansion in the number of doctors willing to take Medicaid patients. What with low fee schedules, cumbersome paperwork and fear of malpractice litigation, that pool is shrinking steadily. And the women most at risk -abusers of alcohol and drugs - are often the least likely to look for help.
Even so, as the report points out, prenatal care that can prevent a baby's being born too small can cost as little as $400. The lifetime medical costs often associated with low birthweight can run as high as $400,000. Sense and humanity thus combine to teach the obvious lesson: save money and rescue lives, early.
A year's supply of AZT, the only drug with some efficacy against the AIDS virus, costs a patient $8,000. A Federal grant to the states is available for those who can't afford it. But the grant runs out in September, leaving uninsured patients with a choice. They can stop taking AZT, or spend themselves into poverty, until their assets are worth less than $3,100, so as to qualify for Medicaid.
The Federal grant has little chance of being renewed, and states are not rushing to make good the shortfall. That focuses attention on the immediate cause of the crisis, the price of AZT, said to be the highest ever charged for a drug. The cost is personally devastating to those who must spend down to poverty, but the burden of paying for AZT in the end is borne by everyone through higher taxes and insurance costs.
Burroughs Wellcome, the manufacturer, says AZT is unusually expensive to make and that it has ''committed more than $80 million'' to developing the drug. But some of the $80 million is contracts for future supplies, not money actually spent. In any case, the cost of bringing the average drug to market is far higher - $125 million.
Burroughs did have a good reason for charging a high initial price, but the reason is no longer valid. When AZT was introduced, in March 1987, other and maybe better AIDS drugs were expected imminently. The company feared it would have limited time to earn back its investment. But the competitors have not materialized even now, and the market for AZT is booming. Last December Burroughs cut the price so as to reduce the annual cost to patients from $10,000 to $8,000.
Does $8,000 still represent an unreasonable profit? Only Burroughs knows, since it refuses to discuss costs. But some general principles apply. One is that drug companies should be allowed every incentive to develop effective drugs, especially for AIDS. Burroughs took a chance on AZT; why shouldn't its reward be to charge whatever the market will bear?
Perhaps because of another principle, that profit should be related to risk. Burroughs did not bear the full risk of developing AZT from scratch. The chemical was first synthesized in 1964 by Jerome Horwitz, a researcher supported by the National Cancer Institute. His hope was that AZT would work against cancer.
Its effectiveness against the AIDS virus was shown in 1985 by the National Cancer Institute's Samuel Broder. He developed a special screening system and tested AZT at Burroughs's request. But by the time the Government thought of applying for a patent on the drug it had invented and tested, it found Burroughs had done so first.
AZT is still the only drug that offers clear benefit to people with AIDS. Burroughs has earned a generous profit for its contribution. It took the risk of paying for manufacture and clinical testing at a time when AZT's privileged position seemed likely to be short-lived. But that's a considerably lesser risk than the patent system is designed to reward, that of developing a drug independently.
A drug company should not usually have to justify its profit, but AZT is a special case. The Government made major contributions to its development. Burroughs Wellcome is a subsidiary of a charitable trust whose founder, Sir Henry Wellcome, directed that earnings be used for research to improve the physical condition of mankind. He would surely be horrified to learn that people were being forced to sell their homes and property in order to meet his company's price for a life-prolonging drug.
In California, high automobile insurance rates have inspired a consumer revolt and a set of ballot initiatives aimed at controlling costs. In New Jersey, where rates are even higher, residents may be forgiven a certain cynicism about efforts to control costs. Every time Trenton has put its collective hand to this problem in recent years, the result has been higher rates, not lower. Yet the remedies remain clear.
Insurance for one car in New Jersey now approaches $1,000 a year, one of the highest statewide averages in the country. But insurers say they can't make money and have all but stopped writing new policies. As a result, the state's Joint Underwriting Fund, the equivalent of an assigned-risk pool, now insures about half of all drivers.
New Jersey's insurance costs are high because of its flawed no-fault system. Initially adopted in 1973, no-fault was supposed to cut costs by reducing litigation over accident claims. But in a bow to politically powerful trial lawyers, the law left a huge loophole by allowing lawsuits where medical expenses exceed $200 - a ridiculously low threshold.
In New York, lawsuits were cut by 80 percent when the state replaced a $500 threshold with a general one, requiring a ''serious injury'' to sue. Governor Kean has pressed for such a threshold in New Jersey, and the Assembly has passed it several times. But the Senate has consistently resisted, arguing that greedy insurance companies, not litigious consumers, are the problem.
New Jersey is also one of only two states (Michigan is the other) that impose no cap on medical coverage for auto accident victims. When New Jersey motorists pay car insurance premiums, they are also paying for expensive health insurance -even though their general health insurance could cover medical bills from an auto accident.
A serious-injury standard for lawsuits and a cap on medical coverage would hold New Jersey's premium costs to a reasonable level. A responsible legislature would not grant a lobby of trial lawyers the power to escalate insurance costs for more than four million drivers. If that point isn't appreciated in Trenton now, voters will have a chance to make it clearer in November next year.
Look in a mirror. Say ''cheese.'' What do you see? You see teeth, most of which are probably real and none of which could be called humongous. But they would have been if sometime around the end of the ice age somebody hadn't figured out that the wisest way to eat a flash-frozen mammoth was to thaw it over a fire.
On the day cooking was born, humankind's teeth started to get smaller.
Anthropologists at the University of Michigan have demonstrated that in the last 10,000 years tooth size has been shrinking twice as fast as it did during the previous 90,000 years. And the shrinking will go on as long as the need for choppers large enough to make mincemeat out of raw flesh continues to diminish. Conceivably, our descendants may be sporting teeth the size of rice kernels. That is not an attractive thought - except in one respect: smaller teeth mean smaller troubles. If our ancestors hadn't come up with the earth oven, mealtime wouldn't be as much fun. More important, our teeth would be twice their present size.
That would mean crater-sized cavities and gold inlays costing twice the money because they had to cover twice the territory. It would mean spending twice the time suffering root canal surgery and the ministrations of the hygienist. And it would mean risking blindness when smiled upon by the child who's wearing braces.
Rejoice, therefore, that about 75,000 years ago a Neanderthal pulled that night's dinner out of the deep freeze and said, ''I think I'll warm this up.''
''May I have your name, please?'' asks the nurse behind the sliding glass window.
''I don't have a name,'' I reply. ''I have a number.''
''Oh, y-yes,'' she stumbles. ''I'll take the number, then.'' I have a fleeting moment of pity for the woman and her awkwardness. Then I remember why I am here - to be tested for exposure to AIDS - and my pity dissipates.
The woman tells me to take a seat in a cheerful waiting room decorated in bright, primary-colored fabric, not unlike a score of other rooms in the vast, ambulatory care unit at the Massachusetts General Hospital.
Almost immediately, a pleasant-looking bearded man in his late 30's appears and asks me to fill out a blue form and seal it in a plain white envelope. The form and envelope bear little white stickers with ''30090900AM-1'' in computer-generated print.
Will I have to list the number of sexual partners I have had in the past five years, the sexual acts I engage in on a regular basis, the venereal diseases I have contracted? I imagine an epidemiologist reading the form, elbowing his colleague, saying ''Wait till you read this one!''
The form asks only routine questions: residential zip code; previous AIDS tests and their results; and recent health history. I answer the questions and seal the envelope, the honor of 30090900AM-1 still intact.
I survey the dozen or so others in the waiting area. Things don't seem to add up. There are several men in their late 20's and 30's, all of whom could be gay. But what about that young couple, a man and a woman, whispering private jokes into each other's ear and giggling? Or the older woman reading a magazine, the teenage boy in sweat pants, the middle-aged businessman?
At length, I realize that this is an outpatient clinic. People come here for flu shots, mononucleosis screenings, ingrown toenails, for all I know. My mind races as my eyes move from person to person. Could they possibly realize why I am here? Will they move away in fear if I sneeze?
Would I move away if the black man in the corner sneezes? Why do I assume he is an IV-drug abuser, infected, dangerous? Am I the worst bigot in the room? And what could all these people make of this business of numbers instead of names? What do I make of it? I feel a hand on my shoulder and glance up with a start. It's the bearded man who gave me the forms. He must be a counselor. ''Would you like to come in now?'' he asks with a gentle smile. I gather my things and whisper to the mustachioed young man next to me, ''No, if you want the honest truth, I don't want to come with you.'' He is clearly here for the same thing and chuckles as I walk away.
''The first thing I want to ask is whether you mind if a counselor-in-training sits in on this interview,'' the bearded man says. I don't mind at all. There will be hundreds, thousands going through this in the months to come.
Be magnanimous, I tell myself; help break in a new person. It may make this horror show a little easier for someone else, kind of like donating an organ on your deathbed.
Another man, younger than the first counselor, joins us, introduces himself, and sits down. Then the predictable questions begin. Why do you think you have been exposed to AIDS? Do you understand the meaning of the test result? How will you feel if you are positive? Negative?
I launch into my prepared remarks. I had sex four years ago with a man who died of AIDS last month. Yes, I know all about the test. I know that a positive result only tells me I have been exposed to the virus. The problem is teaching the rest of the world that I am not some kind of Typhoid Mary. If we could only do that, maybe you wouldn't have to call me 30090900AM-1.
If the results are positive, I know what I will do. I will lie, by my silence, to prospective employers. I will deny having been tested if friends ask the inevitable question, ''Have you had it done yet?''
I will join a support group for people like myself because I want to have a relationship with someone who won't say good-bye when I share my fears with him, the way my last lover did. And I will not admit I have had this test if I am applying for insurance, since no one will be able to prove a thing. Here in Massachusetts, my name is not registered in a ''confidential file'' - whatever that's supposed to mean - as it would be in Colorado, South Carolina and a few other states.
The counselor asks me if I have any questions. ''No,'' I reply. None that you or anyone else can answer. ''Oh, by the way,'' he adds, ''do you have an organ donor card? Tear it up if your results are positive.'' My liver, my eyes, my heart: diseased, infected, unwanted. So much for making things a little easier for someone else. So much for magnanimity.
As I walk toward the cubicle to have my blood drawn, I wonder if it would be easier for my family if I have 30090900AM-1 inscribed on my tombstone, just to avoid the stigma.
To hell with them, I think, and to hell with lovers who can't cope, and to hell with a society that forces me to become 30090900AM-1 just to protect my ''Constitutionally guaranteed'' rights and liberties.
I am greeted in the cubicle by a short, sweet-looking woman who assures me that ''this won't hurt a bit.'' She snaps on a pair of latex gloves, draws the blood, then smiles. ''You're going to be fine,'' she croons softly, patting my arm. ''Just fine.''
We'll see.
Medicare has just notified me that my final 18 hospital visits to Florence, an 84-year-old woman dying of cancer last April, were designated as ''medically unnecessary.'' Accordingly, I must return my fees for those visits within 45 days or face fines of up to $2,000 for each allegedly needless visit. I am allowed to appeal.
Florence died on the day of the final ''unnecessary'' visit, victim of a rapidly spreading lung cancer that left her terribly short of breath, emaciated and so weak that she needed continuous nursing care to be fed, given medicine and cleaned.
If Florence were alive today, she would be aghast at the thought that nothing was accomplished by my daily visits to her as her life ebbed away. She looked forward to seeing me and, after my examination, would talk about her fears and what could be done to alleviate her suffering. She was comforted by our discussions and touched by my concern.
The anonymous Medicare employee who reviewed Florence's case was surely correct in denying the necessity of my visits if their sole purpose was to promote her physical well-being. The form letter to me states that my services to Florence are not covered by Medicare because they were not necessary for the treatment of ''the illness.'' How many times, however, have we physicians been reminded that it is our duty to treat the patient, not just the illness?
What about the tens of thousands of worried but basically healthy people who visit doctors offices every month? Are all those visits ''unnecessary?''
The whole notion that casual review of patient hospital records by Medicare functionaries can establish or refute the necessity of a specific doctor visit is both ludicrous and unfair.
Think of the implications of the Medicare denial notice. If my visits to Florence were unnecessary, then I need not have seen her during the terminal phase of her hospitalization.
But wasn't I both legally and morally responsible for her care as long as she remained hospitalized, whether or not it was effective in prolonging her life? I know of no physician who would stop visiting a terminally ill patient under similar circumstances.
If my appeal to Medicare is rejected, it implies that I was either to ignore Florence or visit her daily, review her medications, examine her and discuss her case with her family but not submit a fee for my visits. This is patently unfair. Since it seems to many physicians that the vast majority of the notices go to doctors who refuse to become full participants in Medicare, the entire exercise is viewed as simple harassment designed to convince independent practicioners to join Medicare and accept the Government's fee structure. The question of whether a physician's service to his patient is appropriate should not depend on whether that doctor is a member of Medicare.
I do not mean to imply that there is no medical featherbedding. And I am well aware of the exasperation of Government officials who are desperate to contain health costs.
But expenses should not be controlled by the arbitrary and presumptuous meddling of Medicare functionaries in doctor-patient relationships. While the sums to be saved by such dubious methods are insignificant, the bitterness and cynicism that are engendered in honest and dedicated physicians - who still make up the vast majority - would contaminate the profession and degrade the quality of care for everyone.
Only Jorge Delgado knew what demons drove him to defile St. Patrick's Cathedral with murderous violence. But his recent rampage, in which he killed an elderly usher and was himself shot down by police, resulted all too predictably from chronic mental health care mismanagement.
In the 1970's, New York and other states walked willingly into a legendary policy fiasco. State mental hospitals discharged or refused admission to thousands of patients, saying that they could be cared for more humanely in the community. For too many, the community turned out to be the street.
In the 1980's, state officials belatedly recognized the need to provide more community care. In New York, state funds for such programs increased fourfold to $100 million annually from 1981 to 1987. But money isn't enough. According to a cogent report from the State Communities Aid Association, most community care still consists of outpatient services for people sane enough to seek help. Those services rarely reach the most bizarre or violent.
Meanwhile, other social trends have produced a nightmarish increase in those hard cases. The shrinking supply of low-income housing means that thousands of the mentally ill are also homeless - a condition that by itself may induce insanity. More thousands seek solace in alcohol or drugs, notably crack. The result is dangerous chaos. In 1976, New York City police took 1,000 mentally disturbed people to hospitals in a year. A decade later, the figure was 18,500.
In effect, the hospital emergency room has become the city's first line of response for the worst of the mentally ill. Those deemed too sick or dangerous for immediate release are admitted. But demand for psychiatric ''acute care'' beds has rapidly outpaced considerable efforts to expand them, providing a powerful incentive for quick release. Once stabilized, the acute cases are likely to be discharged with little regard for their future.
Thus a stream of pathetically impaired souls constantly sifts through the mental health sieve. One was Mr. Delgado; it is remarkable that more do not turn out to be walking time bombs.
Hospital officials and Mayor Koch say their hands are tied by laws that permit patients to resist involuntary confinement. That's a dodge. The core problem is the drastic shortage of safe, decent places to send all those patients once they no longer need acute hospital care - residential programs where they can be supervised, persuaded to stay on stabilizing medications and otherwise supported.
But in this case, obvious policy makes hard politics. Most communities react with fury at the merest whisper of locating a residential mental health program in the neighborhood. Small wonder the Mayor focuses on civil rights.
New York State's Mental Health Commissioner, Richard Surles, responds more usefully with plans for new psychiatric emergency rooms. That's a commendable idea, but it doesn't address the shortage of residential programs.
There is no lack of resources: New York State now spends $3.2 billion in Federal, state and local revenues on mental health services. The problem is how to confront the politics of community mental health. In St. Patrick's Cathedral, two men paid with their lives for the failures to do so.
To be ignorant about AIDS prevention is to court death. But while countless television ads tell how to dull a headache and sweeten bad breath, those counseling how to avoid this tragic disease are rare. NBC and ABC have run a few ads advocating condom use; CBS hasn't run any.
Finally, however, the three major television networks will broadcast a public service campaign developed by the Advertising Council that will talk about AIDS and condoms. The campaign, which also includes print, radio and transit ads, is aimed at young women and teen-age boys, especially in minority groups - the theory being that the homosexual community is already well informed about AIDS and condom use.
CBS says it will run the commercials only after 9 P.M. ABC says it won't limit the time periods and NBC says it hasn't decided on times. May all the networks borrow a leaf from Surgeon General C. Everett Koop's book and send this message about condoms and AIDS prevention loud and clear and often.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
By capitulating to activists who regard abortion as immoral, a French company called Groupe Roussel Uclaf may be committing a larger immorality, ordaining the death of tens of thousands of women around the world. That's the judgment of people who should know - doctors attending the current World Congress of Gynecology and Obstetrics in Rio de Janeiro.
Roussel, having developed RU 486 to end first-trimester pregnancies safely, says it will stop distribution because of pressure from anti-abortion groups. Perhaps a worldwide outcry can now persuade the company to take a braver position. The health of millions of women, especially in less-developed countries, may depend on it.
Used in conjunction with prostaglandin, RU 486 is almost 100 percent effective when taken within 49 days of the patient's last menstrual period. But noisy activists have already kept RU 486 out of the United States by promising boycotts of any pharmaceutical company that dares apply for Government approval to market it. Now their French counterparts are keeping RU 486 out of European countries - and poorer countries where, in Africa especially, hospitals contain ward after ward of women convalescing from botched abortions.
Those who have booed, hissed and shouted Roussel into backing away haven't succeeded in making abortions illegal. What they have done is to deny women safer abortions. Surgical procedures risk blood loss, complications from anesthesia and perforated organs. Those risks are fairly rare in industrialized countries, but not elsewhere.
France's anti-abortion protesters, like their American counterparts, say they'll fight RU 486's being allowed on the market for any reason whatsoever. That's the case even if the drug is eventually proved useful for treating estrogen-fed breast cancers and endometriosis, a major cause of female infertility.
Roussel, citing ''emotion,'' has made it impossible for any pharmaceutical company, no matter where it is, to provide women with this safe, nonsurgical way to end a pregnancy. The company now says it might change its mind. ''We might resume distribution of RU 486 if the atmosphere becomes peaceful again,'' a company official told a radio interviewer.
That the atmosphere surrounding abortion will ever become ''peaceful'' seems remote. Sensibly Roussel would now listen to the millions who believe that women, having a legal right to abortion, also have a moral right to a drug that can reduce the chances of illness and death. It is they, and not a corps of noisy intimidators, who should have the company's ear.
An article in Science Times on Oct. 25 about cholesterol testing in children cited a study at the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine indicating that a restricted-cholesterol diet did not impair children's growth.
Other studies, too, have suggested that such a diet does not harm children; they should have been cited in preference to the Cincinnati study, which was published in August 1986 in the journal Pediatrics. The Cincinnati study was repudiated in July 1987 by the National Institutes of Health, which asserted that the research had violated scientific standards.
Every year at least 33,000 New York City teen-agers - nearly half of whom are 17 or younger -get pregnant. If anyone were to ask them why, the majority would probably answer ''Why not?'' It isn't as if parenthood would stop them from finishing school, embarking on careers, buying their own homes. They hadn't planned on doing those things anyway. Most, in fact, have no plans at all.
The Children's Aid Society's Teen Pregnancy Prevention Program therefore provides teen-agers with plans. The 220 youngsters, male and female, who are enrolled have summer jobs and the promise of a Hunter College education should they complete the program and graduate from high school.
Most of them will probably make it, too. In the nearly four years since the program began - in Central Harlem, where the teen pregnancy rate and the infant mortality rate are the city's highest -only two of the girls have gotten pregnant and only one of the boys has fathered a child. In a city where 40 percent of all girls will be pregnant at least once before 20, this is a significant success.
The program, which involves teachers, medical personnel, social workers and some volunteers, functions out of community centers similar to old-fashioned settlement houses. The idea is to give youngsters the kind of care that is supposed to come from one's own family: medical and dental care, academic assessments and help with homework, sex education, athletic programs and a performing arts program. ''It means being in for the long haul,'' says the program's director, Dr. Michael Perrera - ''seven days a week for several years.''
A program so comprehensive doesn't come cheap. It is funded by a little money from New York State's Department of Social Services and the Children's Aid Society, and a lot more from foundations and a few corporations. But the cost of $1,500 per child per year is a drop in the bucket compared with the billions spent on welfare, Medicaid and food stamps for teen-age mothers and their babies. The other cost of teen-age pregnancy - blighted lives -is, of course, incalculable.
All over the country Americans are looking for ways to help poor young mothers raise their children. Any Americans looking for a way to help them stay in school, get a job and delay childbearing would do well to look this way.
Correction:  November 7, 1988, Monday, Late City Final Edition
An editorial on Saturday referred incorrectly to the director of the Children's Aid Society's Teen Pregnancy Prevention Program. He is Dr. Michael Carrera.
Beyond pain and ostracism, AIDS victims often also face a housing problem. All New Yorkers share an interest in City Hall's attempts to solve it.
Typically, AIDS victims who are hospitalized lose housing they may have been renting; at that point they may also need lodging that includes supportive, as opposed to medical, services. The lack of such housing prolongs hospital stays, thus denying space to those with other illnesses. All of that makes a strong case for new city-run facilities to house needy AIDS patients.
Money is not an issue. The city has budgeted $25 million in capital funds for such a project. The state is believed to have reserve funds unaffected by its budget deficit. The Federal Government, though subject to some statutory limits, has committed itself to pay an unusually large part of the development cost. The city has developed a plan for three kinds of housing for those at different stages of illness. All would be relatively expensive to build from scratch, and in any case, the urgency of the need makes new construction unacceptably time-consuming.
That's why City Hall asked the five borough presidents six months ago to list structures in their boroughs that might be adapted for use in this program. No answers came back. Then City Hall identified eight buildings capable of modification. But four borough presidents responded to the list with dismay over ''insufficient consultation.''
The fifth, David Dinkins of Manhattan, took a more enlightened position. He reserved the right to reject the proposals but stressed the urgency of need and asserted that proper design and management of facilities are more important than location.
AIDS does not respect neighborhood boundaries, and the pressure the victims' housing problems inflict on hospitals bears on the general health. The Mayor's plan deserves help from the borough presidents, not more obstruction.
In 1981 New Jersey became one of the few states to require instruction in schools about human sexuality. Local districts, however, may decide content and message - which helps explain why the programs have had strong parent and community support.
A bill just passed by the State Assembly would limit the community's right to decide what to teach about pregnancy and AIDS - and could cause an upsurge in both. The legislation, sponsored by Assemblywoman Marion Crecco, would require teachers in all schools to ''stress that abstinence from sexual activity is the only completely reliable means of preventing the sexual transmission of acquired immune deficiency syndrome'' and of avoiding pregnancy before marriage.
Though many adults will have no reason to fault that message, it's doubtful that many teen-agers will heed it. More than half the nation's adolescents report they've had sexual intercourse by 17. Abstinence is the first line of defense, and kids need to be told so. But they need to be told more as well. In stressing abstinence, the Crecco bill slights necessary information. May the State Senate, which has yet to vote on the proposal, have the wisdom to say no.
A recent ''Our Towns'' column in The Times by Michael Winerip vividly portrayed a Jersey City minister's frustration with drug dealing. ''Louise Miller, 65, one of his most respected members . . . said a dealer who lives in her building had roughed her up and slashed her tires. She was afraid to go out. 'I have to go for my dialysis appointment,' she  [ said ]  . . . 'What do I do?' ''
The minister and his flock reflect the anxieties of millions, and last month, Congress responded. It enacted an anti-drug bill that, among other things, created a new Cabinet-level ''drug czar.'' President-elect Bush is likely to appoint the first one any day now. A czar to do what?
The obvious first task is to fight for more funds. The drug bill grandly authorizes $2.7 billion over two years while providing only $500 million. But the Federal war on drugs requires much more than money. The new official's highest responsibility will be to formulate a clear policy and then explain it to an ever more fearful public.
The lack of leadership against drugs counts as one of the great failures of the Reagan Administration. It watched as crack, the cheap, smokable form of cocaine, stirred a new wave of addiction and violence. Big cities are reporting vastly more murders from drug abuse and trafficking. Yet no Federal official has yet come forth with a thoughtful, coherent policy in response.
If dismaying, that's not so surprising. Public support for tougher enforcement against a narcotics industry whose volume may approach $100 billion annually masks a profound ambivalence that bars any simple solution. But that hardly prohibits serious leadership.
Leadership begins by defining the issue properly. That means recognizing that drug abuse has become a massive public health problem. Sensible responses need to keep that in mind - as the new drug bill does, by increasing to 55 percent the amount of Federal funds spent on drug treatment and education. In that light, it's possible to set priorities:
Provide Drug Treatment on Demand. For most drug users, addiction turns recreation into a daily nightmare, and many addicts seek help. Finding it in many cities is another kind of nightmare: applicants often must wait months. Washington's goal ought to be immediate treatment for all who request it.
A drug that blocks the craving for cocaine the way methadone blocks craving for heroin would make high-volume drug treatment easier and more cost-effective. Federal research money could speed the development of such a drug.
Use the Media to Educate. Massive publicity about crack has apparently discouraged potential young middle-class users. The challenge is to extend the message to the alienated poor. No advertising campaign can by itself counter the hopelessness and pain of poverty, but carefully researched and focused anti-drug messages may have effect.
Don't Legalize Dangerous Drugs. Making heroin and cocaine legal might reduce crime, but the health cost would be enormous. Needle abuse spreads AIDS. One study has found that a high proportion of children born to cocaine users suffer from brain abnormalities. At the same time, it might make sense to extend the decriminalizing of marijuana, which probably affects health less.
Focus Law Enforcement on the Street. Law enforcement, especially at the Federal level, remains too preoccupied with stopping drugs at the border. America's borders are so long that Federal agencies cannot hope to police every yard. Meanwhile, drug traffickers make so much they can afford to lay out millions for ships, planes, trucks, couriers and bribes. Law enforcement has a more effective role to play on the streets harassing retailers and customers and reclaiming the safety of neighborhoods where drug dealers have taken over.
The Feds also need to declare war on the heavily armed street gangs that now control much of drug dealing. For too long, they have been turning peaceful neighborhoods into zones of terror. Lately they are beginning to spread their operations across the country. Washington especially needs to limit their access to automatic weapons. No concern for the individual's right to bear arms can possibly justify giving military assault rifles to teen-age thugs.
On drug policy, the Reagan Administration is an easy act to follow. The nation's first drug czar needs to combine the talents of a good public health physician, a good cop - and a good communicator of realistic hopes in a difficult cause.
The apparent success of a new methadone drug treatment program in Harlem offers a glimmer of hope for the war on drugs and a strong ray for the war on AIDS. It deserves broad attention in Albany and the nation.
Methadone is a drug that blocks the craving for heroin. It acquired a bad reputation in the 60's and 70's. According to critics, badly managed treatment centers attracted unsavory crowds and created a new market in illicit methadone.
In response, state officials and Washington set strict regulations on staffing and use of space in methadone programs. They also required that all distribution be accompanied by extensive psychological counseling. While the rules have tamed the wilder fringes of methadone treatment, they also limit the capacity of all methadone programs. Addicts seeking help often wait for months.
The realization that AIDS is being spread by needles as much as by sex forces new scrutiny of the Federal rules. Last year Beth Israel Medical center obtained Federal permission for an experimental Harlem clinic. Staffed by a single nurse, the clinic offers methadone without counseling to 150 wait-listed applicants. The participants move to full treatment as places open.
A year later, the results so impress the Feds that they have granted the clinic permanent exemptions from the rules. A study of participants found that their rate of needle abuse declined sharply while their quality of life improved. Some addicts on methadone continued to use cocaine, but many stopped abusing it with needles. That's profoundly encouraging for the fight against AIDS.
Yet Federal approval doesn't permit permanent expansion of the program. Albany must also approve similar exemptions - but state officials still express reservations about the free and easy methadone programs of old. Those concerns are outdated, what with state health officials estimating 71,000 AIDS deaths by 1994. The Harlem project demonstrates that methadone can be distributed freely, responsibly and effectively.
More important, critics need to offer another answer for the treatment waiting lists. The Harlem approach does not offer methadone instead of more comprehensive treatment; it offers methadone instead of nothing at all.
The horror stories from hospitals beset by drug abusers, AIDS victims and penniless patients all seem to share a common theme: the crippling shortage of nurses. A new Federal nursing commission report documents the urgency of the problem. Higher pay is only part of the answer.  The nursing labor market usually fluctuates with the economy. Women with nursing training stay home during good times but return to work when the economy turns down. The current shortage is more serious. Nearly 80 percent of all trained nurses are currently working, a record level. Demand is rising sharply; fewer young people are entering the profession.
The demand arises in part from efforts to hold down hospital costs. Other changes increase the pressure, like the demands of AIDS and drug-related ailments, the increasing complexity of medicine and the aging of the population.
What's the sensible response? The Federal nursing commission appeals for more money. Nursing, its report says, suffers severely from salary ''compression.'' Salaries start decently in the $20,000's but don't rise much. A nurse can't ever expect to make more than $40,000, even with years of experience and increased responsibility. Small wonder that more young women interested in medicine now aspire to be doctors.
The commission recommends a one-time increase, specifically earmarked for nurses' salaries, in the money Medicare pays hospitals for services to the elderly. Its report also laments the Reagan Administration's 1983 cutoff of all aid to nursing education and calls for a resumption of loans to nursing school students willing to serve after graduation in inner city or rural hospitals.
But salary improvements alone are not likely to end the nursing shortage. Working conditions, benefits and image are as important as cash. Thus some hospitals are experimenting with more flexible hours and increased responsibility. Some are considering on-site day care. Pensions in early middle age, of the sort traditional for police officers, would be as appropriate for nurses - similarly prone to burnout. The benefit, which might bring more men into the recruiting pool, would increase compensation without distorting hospital salary structures.
In opposition to those costly responses, thoughtful officials like David Axelrod, New York State's Health Commissioner, argue for rethinking hospital organization. Hospitals, he suggests, could conserve nursing resources by finding other ways to provide routine care. Patients past the critical stages of illness may be put up in hotel-like quarters, tended by their families, with minimal nursing supervision.
Whether by spending more or reorganizing -or by doing both - the shortage demands attention. Nursing is as essential to orderly urban life as police or fire protection. Cities long ago learned the importance of paying police and firefighters well and holding them in high esteem. To believe nursing staffs can be sustained with less is to court disaster.
Debate over the drug problem sometimes deteriorates into banal oversimplification. Hawks want tougher law enforcement; doves favor drug treatment. Wiser heads understand that both are needed. So do Alexis Vega and John Moore.
Mr. Vega says he's addicted to crack. Mr. Moore is a Bronx Criminal Court judge. Last October, Mr. Vega decided he wanted to end his addiction. But all the treatment programs he called turned him away for lack of space.
Desperate, Mr. Vega went to the police. When officers told him treatment wasn't their job, he brandished his drug paraphernalia, smashed station house windows and finally got himself arrested. Brought before judges, he pleaded for treatment. Two made no effort to help, but at last, Judge Moore took an interest, made a personal call to managers of a drug treatment program and persuaded them to take Mr. Vega.
All this came to light on the day after Governor Cuomo gave a speech pointing out that while law enforcement is working hard to fight drugs, it can't hope to handle the problem by itself. He then announced a new task force, to be headed by Lieut. Gov. Stan Lundine, to bring drug treatment agencies together with law enforcement and to better coordinate their efforts.
Alexis Vega understands.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
The United States and the European Community are on the verge of poisoning relations with each other over the Community's plan to ban imports of meat treated with growth hormones. If neither backs down before the deadline, midnight Saturday, their best course would be to seek a neutral arbiter. The alternative is a damaging trade war that isn't worth it.
The ban would apply to all countries outside the 12-nation Community, not just America. Europe's farmers are already prohibited from using the hormones; Brussels claims that stopping imports would simply apply equal treatment to foreign meat. That kind of regulatory equality is allowed under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which sets the rules on trade restrictions. But the agreement also forbids regulations that pose unfair curbs to trade.
The move against hormones, as a health hazard, originated with West German consumer activists. It was to be applied to imports last Jan. 1, but was postponed when Washington objected to the health charge.
About $100 million worth of U.S. exports would be shut out. Washington plans to retaliate with onerous tariffs on an equal volume of imports from Europe. Brussels then threatens to counter-retaliate, and Washington may then re-retaliate. That's the road to mutual destruction.
The European Community's protection of its small farm population against foreign competition is a major obstacle to global trade expansion. With Europeans now aiming for tighter internal unity by 1992, many fear that they will become more protectionist. In this context, the hormone dispute is part of a greater battle.
Washington is right to press at every turn for the reduction of trade restrictions. In this case, it argues that hormones pose no health risk, but it is up against a stubborn barrier - Europe's sovereign right to set its own health regulations.
Other meat exporters, like Australia and Argentina, have decided to ship only hormone-free beef to Europe after the ban takes effect; Washington resists costly certification procedures. The United States and Europe now need a referee, such as a GATT committee, to avoid even more costly warfare.
Happy New Year, folks! But don't bother to read George Bush's lips. No matter what he said in the campaign, Federal taxes went up on Jan. 1 for a lot of Americans - most brutally for those who are elderly and reasonably well off financially.
You've run up balances on your credit cards? You're buying your automobile on time? No matter what they call it, your taxes just went up because in 1989 you can only deduct 20 percent of your credit-card and auto-loan interest charges, rather than the 40 percent you were allowed last year.
Social Security payroll taxes, for another unhappy example, will be levied this year on the first $48,000 of your income, compared with the first $45,000 in good old 1988. If you're doing that well, your payroll tax will go up from the maximum of $3,380 the Feds hit you for last year to a maximum of $3,605 in 1989. So will the matching Social Security taxes your employer pays.
But by far the biggest increases in tax liabilities will be those of older people eligible for Medicare benefits who also pay Federal income taxes of $150 a year, or more. They'll get a lot for their money - insurance coverage for catastrophic illness -but their tax costs could keep going up.
Last summer Congress approved and President Reagan signed the greatest expansion of Medicare since its inception in 1965, affecting 32 million Americans immediately, and practically everyone who reaches retirement age in the future. From now on, expanded Medicare will pay for unlimited hospital stays for retired people, for much of any unusually large doctors' bills they incur, and -beginning in 1991 - for a major proportion of onerous drug charges.
In the past, Medicare paid for only 60 hospital days, and only after the patient paid a deductible of $540. As of Jan. 1, 1989, the deductible rises by a modest $24, but Medicare will pay total remaining hospital bills, for any length of stay. The $564 deductible will have to be paid only once a year, no matter how many times or for how long a patient may be hospitalized.
After a patient has paid an initial $1,370 in doctors' fees in any one year, all remaining doctors' bills will be paid by Medicare. Fifty percent of drug costs, after a deductible of $600, will be paid starting in 1991, with the percentage to be picked up by Medicare rising in stages to 80 percent in 1993.
Thus, the most any Medicare patient will have to pay in any one year, starting in 1991, in hospital, doctor and drug bills - no matter the duration of the illness, or how many times hospitalized - is $2,534, the sum of the deductibles, plus half at first, later only 20 percent of remaining drug costs. That's not a negligible total, but it should remove the fears of many retired people that even one catastrophic illness could wipe out their life savings, or force them to sell their homes.
As Adlai Stevenson once remarked, however, there are no gains without pains. The estimated $30 billion cost of these new benefits in the first five years will not be paid by the general society, or by future recipients (as in Old Age and Survivors' Insurance, the program generally called ''Social Security''). Only those immediately eligible for the benefits will pay for them.
For some, these costs will be steep - maybe more so than anyone now foresees. Participants in Medicare's Part B (which covers doctors' fees) have been paying a premium of $297 a year. The expanded coverage of doctors' and drug bills will cause this premium to rise to $373 this year, and in yearly stages to $571 in 1993 - almost twice the 1988 premium.
Most retirees may consider that cheap at the price, but the more affluent among them will suffer additional new charges. Whether or not they ever receive any of the new benefits, they will pay a surcharge of 15 percent on their Federal income tax if it is as much as $150. That's $22.50 at that level for an individual, $45 for a couple filing jointly. For each additional $150 of income-tax liability, retirees will pay another 15 percent surcharge, up to a cap of $800 per person, $1,600 for a couple.
That's stiff enough; the cap will rise, however, to $1,050 per person ($2,100 per couple) in 1993. If, as would not be unexpected, benefit costs exceed estimates, the cap or the surcharge or both probably would be increased. But even as it stands, that new surcharge will sufficiently burden affluent retirees to cast cold water on the easy assumption that Social Security benefits should be taxed even further.
IN THE NATION
Should all Americans have health insurance? Yes; in the richest nation in the world, the question shouldn't be if, but how to finance decent universal coverage fairly and efficiently.
Washington State's pilot project, paying for basic health insurance for the working poor from general tax revenues, offers a promising alternative to the employer-paid system now gearing up in Massachusetts. It's not clear, though, whether individual states can afford to pay for coverage that logically should be underwritten by the Federal Government.
Most Americans receive health insurance from employers as a fringe benefit. When they retire they are covered by Medicare, financed by Federal payroll taxes. The very poor are eligible for Medicaid insurance, with costs shared by Federal and local governments. But some 37 million Americans, mostly working poor and their families, slip through the cracks.
Despite some outrageous exceptions, hospitals don't usually ignore their obligation to care for anyone who is critically ill. One way or another, the unpaid bills of the uninsured are lumped into charges of insured patients. But few uninsured Americans have easy access to routine preventive medical services like prenatal care. And millions never see a doctor until they are very sick.
Massachusetts is tackling the problem by requiring all but the smallest businesses to insure their workers, or to contribute $1,680 per uninsured employee to a state pool. People without private coverage will pay for services according to income. The shortfall is to be covered by the pool and general state revenues.
There is much to be said for the Massachusetts plan, which Senator Edward Kennedy, the longtime champion of health insurance coverage, proposes to extend nationally. Massachusetts employers who do provide insurance will no longer be asked to foot the costs of the uninsured through higher premiums. Most important, everyone will get minimum coverage.
But this approach amounts to a tax on employment, raising the minimum cost of labor by almost a dollar an hour. Adding this expensive mandatory benefit to the existing minimum wage may price unskilled workers out of the market in low-wage states.
In high-wage states like Massachusetts, where there is not likely to be much effect on jobs, there is still a significant drawback: The burden of the implicit tax is likely to fall on those who can least afford it. Economists expect competitive wages to decline as employers try to shift the costs to employees not previously covered.
That's why the Washington State plan looks so good. Families of four with incomes below $23,000 (twice the poverty level) will be able to buy state insurance for a fraction of the cost; the state will cover the rest. There will be no effect on the cost of labor, and thus none on employment opportunities. All taxpayers, rather than the working poor, will pay to extend coverage.
One potential problem with the Washington approach is that it gives employers incentives to drop insurance now offered to low-income workers. Another risk is that tax-based finance will make the state less attractive to affluent people and businesses, and more attractive to the poor.
That is probably not a big risk for Washington State, with its relatively small population of poor people and tradition of caring government. But it could be a serious inhibition to reform for Texas, say, or Florida.
In a nation that constitutionally protects the free movement of individuals and commerce, state-by-state solutions to a national social problem are rarely optimal. The Washington State experiment is worth rooting for. But it would be unfortunate if Federal officials use it as an excuse to leave health insurance finance to the states.
American women fear breast cancer, and with reason: one in ten can expect to get it someday, and it will kill 30 percent of those that do. Now comes evidence that using birth control pills might increase the risk. What's a woman to do?
More than 13 million American women are probably asking themselves that question. The pill is, after sterilization, the most frequent form of birth control in this country. Should they switch immediately to another, less effective method, thus heightening the risk of an unwanted pregnancy? Or should they first weigh the uncertainty of the risk data against the proven benefits of the pill? Common sense suggests the second choice.
The new evidence, presented to an advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration, comes from three studies that found the pill increased breast cancer risk in those who started taking it when they were young.
But the first study found the risk in women who never had children; the second in women with one child; the third in all women. All those studied had taken oral contraceptives when these contained much higher doses of estrogen and progestin. A comparable study of women who take today's lower-dosage pills has yet to be undertaken. In any case, breast cancer is not, like lung cancer, a disease with one clear risk factor. Instead it appears to have links with early first menstruation, late first motherhood and late menopause - all of which are associated with a high standard of living. In that sense breast cancer is, as Dr. Melvin Konner put it, ''a disease of civilization.'' It seems also to run in families and is especially prevalent in countries with high-fat diets.
In short, the link to the pill so far is not strong and the links to other factors are. That gives individual women who use the pill some basis for rational decision. But even as they answer the question for themselves, another question arises: ''When it comes to birth control, why is it always women who have to do the worrying?''
The choice of contraceptives is limited. Information about methods and services is spotty and inconsistent. Research and development is limited not simply by insufficient funds but by the howls of those who perceive most contraceptives as causing or facilitating abortion. For millions of women the pill has been a blessing, and it's reasonable to hope that it will remain so. But as this alarm makes all too clear, it's not enough. American women need more choices; so do American men.
Older Americans cheered last year when Congress broadened Medicare health insurance. Now that they have examined it closely, some of the cheers have turned to harsh complaint. Payments for Medicare coverage under the new catastrophic-illness plan seem to be increasing more than the added benefits are worth.
That's only the appearance; in fact, the enlarged Medicare coverage remains a good deal for most older adults. The complaints are shortsighted or narrow-minded.
Medicare used to cover hospital costs for 60-day ''spells of illness'' after a deductible of $540. Patients who returned to the hospital for a second spell had to pay a second deductible. Even then, the plan covered only 80 percent of its approved rates for doctor bills. The patient had to come up with the 20 percent balance, a hefty sum in the case of major surgery.
Worst of all, there was no coverage for catastrophe. Anyone who needed more than 60 days in the hospital had to find some way to pay for it himself. That's why many older citizens bought private insurance to cover this ''Medigap.''
Dr. Otis Bowen, President Reagan's Secretary of Health and Human Services, figured that charging the Medicare clients a bit more would make it possible to require only one deductible, protect patients from having to spend more than $1,400 a year on doctor bills and eliminate the limit on hospital stays. Congress agreed, and added still more benefits to help pay for prescription drugs and allow easier access to Federal payments for the cost of nursing home care.
Some of the benefits, including the hospital benefits, start this year. So does an increase in the basic Medicare premium. It goes from $335 to $383 a year in 1989, and to $511 a year by 1993. Unfortunately, however, the new plan's biggest plum, the cap on payments to doctors, doesn't start until next year, and the potentially valuable coverage for prescription drugs won't phase in until 1993.
Consequently, many older people will continue their private Medigap insurance - and won't see their premiums decline this year. Some are infuriated also to learn that the plan introduces the principle of progressive financing to Medicare funding. They must pay for the new Federal catastrophic-illness insurance according to their income level. The most affluent clients are charged ''supplemental premiums'' of up to $800 this year. The idea is for the richest of the elderly to help cover the cost of insuring the poorest.
Some of the affluent have descended on Congress in an uproar. They are vocal far out of proportion to their numbers. This year, 56 percent of the 32.3 million Medicare participants will pay only the regular $383 premium. Most others will pay only small supplemental premiums.
Their noisy opposition, furthermore, masks the larger point. Even those who pay the maximum will benefit from a heavy subsidy. According to the Congressional Budget Office, this year's individual Medicare insurance policy is worth $3,191. Even after paying the $800 supplemental premium on top of other contributions, the most affluent retiree will enjoy a public subsidy of $719.
By 1993, when all benefits are phased in, the value of the package will increase to $4,834 and the wealthy retiree will be receiving a subsidy of $1,528. The subsidy to the middle-income retiree is even greater - $2,024 in the first year and $3,184 by 1993.
Congress and the Reagan Administration were right to ordain that the elderly pay for their new Medicare benefits themselves and that they do so on a progressive basis. There's little reason to sympathize with the aggrieved affluent elderly. Yes, they are helping pay for the health care of poorer old people; meanwhile, the rest of society is still helping to pay for theirs.
The Campbell Soup Company boasts in an ad that its soups could ''reduce the risk of heart disease.'' It neglects to mention that the soups' high sodium content could also increase that same risk. Last week, the Federal Trade Commission rightly cited Campbell's for making misleading health claims.
The use of nutritional testimonials to sell food is proliferating, a response to growing consumer concern about diet and health. But until now the F.T.C. has all but ignored its responsibility to police these claims. A special task force of state attorneys general has partly filled the breach.
Campbell's is the only major soup company to include sodium content in the small print on the label, for which it deserves credit. Still, the F.T.C. is on firm ground. Experts including the Surgeon General warn that a diet high in sodium contributes to high blood pressure, increasing the risk of heart disease. To boast of the soup's disease-prevention value is at least incomplete and probably misleading.
The company is appealing the commission's action and has asked for a full hearing before an administrative law judge. Meanwhile, a welcome message reverberates: companies making health claims must disclose both good news and bad. At last, the Federal Government has begun watching.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
An article on Monday described a rise in the number of lesbians who are bearing children, usually after artificial insemination. It included the psychological speculation of clinicians, whom it did not identify, that children of lesbian parents might develop problems in intimate relationships or sexual identity. It said these difficulties could be worse if lesbian parents are openly hostile to men.
The article also quoted a psychologist and ethicist who expressed deep reservations about lesbian motherhood.
These comments were added to the article during editing. They did not fairly reflect a spectrum of views among behavioral scientists and ethicists about possible effects of being reared by lesbian parents. In the absence of evidence that hostility toward men is common among lesbian parents, the reference to such hostility was unwarranted. The article should have given lesbian parents a chance to respond to the concerns raised by others.
The article attributed to Dr. Richard Green the view that the issue of rearing children without a man in the family has not been studied enough to know whether it will lead to psychological problems. The paraphrase was imprecise. Dr. Green said that it was a particular situation, in which children are conceived with sperm from anonymous donors and reared by lesbian mothers, that has not been studied.
There was a time, well within the memory of most Americans, when one approached meals with a certain innocence. Provided the roast pork wasn't pink in the middle, one assumed that one was getting up from the table in the same good health as when one had sat down. According to the new wisdom, we were eating ourselves to death.
Remember, for instance, the egg? Fried eggs were the way to start the day, and hard-boiled eggs the way to start a diet. Then everybody started talking about cholesterol, and the so-called ''perfect food'' was suddenly deemed imperfect.
Remember how parents threatened, cajoled and bribed their children into finishing their milk, the creamier the better, little realizing they were loading the kids up with fats? Remember butter, and the way we used to let it drip over the side of the pancakes? Remember pancakes? Remember, too, how on summer Sunday afternoons the smoke from millions of backyard barbecues spiraled into the American sky? How we didn't know that charcoal-grilling foods can cause carcinogens to develop? How we dug into those blackened steaks?
Still, despite the crash of one food idol after another, there stood the apple: the fruit that put doctors out of work, and that dentists liked to call ''nature's toothbrush.''
But now, alas, there's Alar. That ripe, red apple sitting in the refrigerator and begging to be bitten may have been sprayed with it. Alar, a growth chemical, appears to be carcinogenic. It's not a big danger; Alar's used on only about 5 percent of the nation's red apples. Still.
Alar will stay on the market for at least another 18 months: the Environmental Protection Agency says it won't suspend all use of the chemical because interim test results don't show conclusively that it poses an imminent hazard to health. The much-put-upon American, meanwhile, is left to approach the apple with all the wariness of Adam.
Gov. Mario Cuomo proposes reducing New York's $2 billion budget deficit by squeezing $310 million out of spending on Medicaid health insurance for the poor. That also squeezes New York City's budget since the city shares costs of the program with Albany and Washington. For the most part, this is no exercise in budget cruelty. As much as two-thirds of the saving would come from cost containment beneficial to both city and state.
But in some areas, the efforts to cut would fall unfairly on the city or produce more aggravation than saving - suggesting the limits on trying to meet the deficit only with spending cuts.
The Cuomo plan would achieve reasonable savings by, for example, taking advantage of new Federal law to shift some nursing home costs to Washington and reviewing Medicaid billings more strictly. But City Hall objects, with reason, to Mr. Cuomo's proposal that the city pay a larger share of services enabling the ailing aged to remain at home.
State and Federal participation had reduced the city's share of these costs to 10 percent. Now Mr. Cuomo would require localities to pick up 20 percent of the home care expense, a move that would cost the city $72.5 million next year. City officials say that's unfair because fully 75 percent of the home care in the state takes place in the city. In any case, to discourage home care, by all accounts better and cheaper than nursing homes, is poor social policy. Why not increase the local share of nursing home rather than home care costs, thereby spreading the burden to localities around the state?
The city makes an even stronger case against state proposals to end some Medicaid payments for doctor-ordered X-rays and laboratory work, and to require nominal ''co-payments'' for doctor visits.
That might well drive patients from private physicians to the city's severely crowded hospital emergency rooms and outpatient clinics. Medicaid sets payments to private doctors at an average of $11 for a visit; the rate is $60 for a clinic visit and $72 for the emergency room. Thus, state policies that divert Medicaid patients to city clinics and emergency rooms could cost the city $32.5 million -and increase the state's costs, too.
New Yorkers can welcome efforts to contain Medicaid costs. But economy and efficiency can save only so much. The proposed cuts go too deep.
The Dec. 18 article ''Two Lives on Hold,'' by William Squadron, husband of Dr. Joan Longer, described the heart-lung transplant undergone by Dr. Longer, in July 1987, to correct the ravages of cystic fibrosis. Dr. Longer died on Jan. 19 in Papworth Hospital, Cambridgeshire, England, from the consequences of organ rejection.
Modern America's Three Plagues blight the South Bronx: poverty, drug addiction and AIDS. The population is now widely infected with a disease that slowly drains the body of control, sight, mind and life. When the administrations of Mayor Edward Koch and Gov. Mario Cuomo are long forgotten, history will surely note that the New York of their era left the poor to rot, in unparalleled numbers, from the cruelest of diseases.
Now there is vivid evidence of just how punishing the AIDS plague has become. Among emergency room patients tested at Bronx-Lebanon Medical Center, 23 percent were found to be infected with the AIDS virus, Bruce Lambert reported recently in The Times. That doesn't necessarily mean a quarter of the South Bronx is infected. Emergency room patients are sicker than the population at large. But it's a horrifying warning.
The people of the South Bronx are mostly black or Hispanic, and poor. Poverty and drug addiction go together. Unable to buy clean needles, heroin addicts share them, thus spreading the blood-borne AIDS virus. Crack houses, where sex is often exchanged for drugs, spur the spread of other diseases, which in turn promote the spread of AIDS. Addicts then infect their partners. In one South Bronx district, 1 of every 25 women giving birth now carries the virus, and nearly half of these infect their babies.
As if the Three Plagues weren't deadly enough, they are magnified by a larger malady: indifference. The poor of the South Bronx do not speak loudly in the councils of state. Other citizens readily see them, if at all, as an underclass, an unregenerate source of addiction and crime.
Society has not, surely, chosen a deliberate policy to let them die. But if it had, the present outcome would not be very different. Governor Cuomo, announcing his five-year plan for combating AIDS, declared last week, ''I want to say as clearly as I can, I am not putting into this plan this year nearly enough money to meet these goals realistically.''
There is no public health plan to stem the spread of AIDS in the South Bronx, just a grab bag of half-hearted initiatives. If society really cared about the Three Plagues, in every South Bronx across the country, many measures might have been tried long ago: Drug treatment would be made available on demand, and centers set up where addicts congregate, conquering local opposition. Instead of having to send addicts back on the street when no drug treatment was available, clinics would be allowed to supply them with clean needles. This would help keep an addict coming back until a treatment slot was ready, meanwhile protecting against infection. Addicts would be urged to avoid sharing needles, to sterilize their works with bleach and to enroll in dirty-for-clean needle exchange programs while awaiting treatment. Each severely affected block would be assigned a health worker charged with insuring that every resident understood how to protect himself against contracting AIDS.
Once the victims of AIDS are dying, with only months to live, public expenditure soars, often reaching $100,000 per case. Were a fraction of the same money available for prevention, many lives would be saved.
Without a serious preventive effort, the incidence of AIDS in the South Bronx will soon approach that in African cities with minimal standards of public health. And the levels in other inner cities won't be far behind, to the enduring shame of all New York and of all America.
Research to devise drugs against AIDS has moved faster than with any previous disease, yet far too slowly for those in need of treatment. AZT, which emerged in 1986, is helpful but no miracle. No other major advance has appeared since then. That makes the reports of two promising new approaches to AIDS all the more welcome.
One is a novel method for custom designing human antibodies against the AIDS virus. The virus eludes the human immune system, apparently because it keeps changing its coat so as to foil the antibodies designed to attack it. But it cannot afford to change one part of the coat, the part that makes a key-like fit with the surface of the virus's target, the T-cells of the immune system.
For unknown reasons, the human immune system fails to make antibodies against this key region of the virus. This omission has now been remedied by Daniel Capon and colleagues at Genentech Inc., Jerome Groopman of the Harvard Medical School and Sam Broder of the National Cancer Institute.
The T-cell surface region attacked by the AIDS virus is a well-studied protein named CD-4. The Genentech team has made human antibodies that have the CD-4 protein in place of the usual target-recognizing region by which antibodies seek out invading viruses or bacteria.
Added to test-tube cultures of human cells, the CD-4-equipped antibodies latch onto AIDS viruses and afford the cells complete protection. They have not yet been tested in patients but in principle should work well. The antibodies last a long time in the bloodstream, as judged by tests in animals. Unlike in the test tube, antibodies given to a patient would have the immune system to back up their attack on the virus, since once they have tagged a foreign organism, scavenger cells arrive to destroy it.
Many drugs that show promise in the test tube fail to work in patients. This may well prove true of the CD-4 antibodies, too. But even if so, the method used to make them - splicing part of the gene for CD-4 into the human antibody-making gene - is so powerful as to give considerable scope for redesigning the antibody until it does work.
Another new advance has come from scientists at Merck & Company who have determined the three-dimensional structure of one of the AIDS virus's enzyme proteins. This is a first step in devising drugs that will disable the enzyme, the role of which is to help in assembling virus particles inside the cell. But such drugs are some way off, because they must avoid harming the equivalent human enzymes.
An effective drug against AIDS is not yet at hand. But hopes of developing one have by no means run dry.
Last summer's drought left a legacy of poison that threatens the country's food supply. Dry weather spurred the spread of the fungus that makes aflatoxin, a highly potent inducer of liver cancer. Dangerous amounts of aflatoxin contaminate a fifth or more of the Middle West's 1988 corn crop, much of which is still in storage. Food companies and governments have multilayered defenses in place to screen against the poison, but these now face a vigorous assault.
The crux of the issue is that the many consignments of corn found to be contaminated are not destroyed but simply rejected. The poisoned corn, as chronicled in a recent Wall Street Journal report, goes back into the pool available for market, and most seems to be consumed one way or another.
Some of the contaminated corn goes to feed beef cattle. The poison is mostly destroyed in the body, but the meat still needs to be checked for aflatoxin residues.
Some of the corn goes to dairy cattle, and dangerous amounts of aflatoxin may pass into the milk. Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, Missouri and Texas have already had to dump contaminated milk.
Some corn is shipped abroad. Since aflatoxin is such a well-known problem, it's the responsibility of importers to have shipments tested according to national food laws.
And some corn, maybe after dilution, is presumably offered again to makers of food products like breakfast cereals, corn bread, corn muffins and hominy.
The scale of the problem is vast. The Middle West provides a third of the world's corn, and a third of test samples in Iowa and Illinois have been found to contain dangerous amounts of aflatoxin, as judged by the Food and Drug Administration's standards. Most years the Quaker Oats cereal plant in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, rejects between 1 and 2 percent of corn shipments; this year's weekly rejection rate runs between 20 and 35 percent. The level of contamination in the 1988 crop thus appears to be at least 10 times greater than usual. What are the chances that the poisoned part of the crop is being redistributed without endangering the food supply?
The main assurance lies in tests conducted by food companies at every stage from raw grain to finished product. They have a strong economic incentive: recall of a product because of unacceptable aflatoxin levels could cause heavy losses.
The F.D.A. also tests raw corn, milled corn and finished food products. So far, none of 71 finished products tested since October have been found to exceed the danger level for aflatoxin, and the F.D.A. believes, though is not certain, that the products were made from 1988 corn. If so, the defenses in place seem to be working so far.
But it's impossible to test every item on the supermarket shelves, and so much poisoned corn is in circulation that it might penetrate chinks in the screening system like small manufacturers who may not thoroughly test their corn purchases.
Minute amounts of aflatoxin are an inevitable ingredient of food, and an extra burden of poison for one year need not necessarily be disastrous. To cause cancer, most carcinogens would have to contaminate a person's diet for years. But any increase in a chemical as potent as aflatoxin is worrisome.
The F.D.A. has already stepped up its aflatoxin tests and its regional inspectors have the authority to test grain in storage. Increased testing by companies and regulators is the least that is required. If that fails to restrict the poisoned corn to cattle feed, more vigorous measures had better be taken against farmers and grain elevator operators who freely traffic in poisoned lots. Corn products and milk seem safe at present, but only special vigilance will contain the threat.
Last fall, University of Michigan anthropologists showed that human tooth size has been shrinking twice as fast in the last 10,000 years as in the previous 90,000. Why? One night a Neanderthal threw a flash-frozen hunk of mammoth on the fire and rendered redundant the kind of choppers one needs to make mincemeat out of raw flesh.
There is reason to believe early humans worried about their teeth even before that first barbecue. The journal Nature reported last month that grooves worn along the sides of teeth - evidence of heavy toothpick use - had been found in 1.8-million-year-old fossils of Homo habilis, an ancestral species. Such grooves are positively rampant in the teeth of Neanderthals and other archaic Homo sapiens. Christy G. Turner 2d writes in Current Anthropology, ''As far as can be empirically documented, the oldest human habit is picking one's teeth.''
O.K., now we know. Nearly two million years before the birth of dentistry as we know it, our forebears were worrying their gums with pointed sticks and pointed fingernails. They may even have rinsed. What we want to know next is, did they have plaque just the same? And if not, was it the pointed sticks as opposed to today's floss that did the trick?
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
A new report by the National Research Council ratifies the conventional wisdom that cutting back on salt, fat and cholesterol can have tangible health benefits. It adds weight to the case for new Federal labeling rules that would help consumers know more precisely what they are eating.
The council report recommends broad changes in eating habits to reduce the risk of heart disease, some types of cancer and other chronic diseases. Better labeling, the council suggests, might encourage manufacturers to make low-fat and low-salt foods more available.
Some have already begun offering healthier fare. Reduced-sodium soups have appeared on shelves of mainstream supermarkets, not just health food stores. So have salt-free breads and snacks. And some leading food processers are switching from artery-clogging coconut and palm oils to vegetable oils low in saturated fat. But there is still plenty of room for improvement. Under lax and outmoded Federal labeling policies, terms like ''lean'' and ''lite'' on a package label do not guarantee reduced fat or calories. Disclosure of a product's saturated fat content is voluntary. A box of cookies may be emblazoned ''baked in pure vegetable oil'' to suggest a lack of cholesterol, yet it may actually contain one of the cheaper tropical oils, far more damaging to cardiovascular health than any animal fat.
Congress can't provide individuals with the willpower they need to stick to a sensible diet. But it can require more comprehensive information on labels that would permit consumers to make informed choices and embarrass manufacturers who persist in using potentially dangerous ingredients. In underscoring the link between nutrition and health, the research council also underscores the cost of continued Congressional inaction.
Foreign agents are organizing disaffected young Americans and arming them for war. They have already seized control of whole neighborhoods, murdering hundreds in the process. Police and public officials are outgunned and overwhelmed.
This scenario isn't fictional; as local thugs carry out the work of foreign drug cartels, the terror in the streets is real. If its purpose were political, America surely would have mounted a determined counterattack long ago. But the terror is a bloody side effect of drug abuse. Americans condemn narcotics, even as they spend billions to buy them - and then recoil in spasms of panic.
Last week brought another spasm, this time over the proliferation of military-style weapons among the drug gangs. New measures to disarm them are needed, but the larger problem requires more than frantic reactions. However complex and daunting the drug problem, the outlines of a constructive, realistic policy are clear.
Speaking of drugs in his Inaugural Address, President Bush declared bravely that ''this scourge must stop.'' But his only concrete proposal has been to call for a tougher Federal death penalty. That's grandstanding: while the increase in murders is alarming, most drug-related crime doesn't involve killing and may not be subject to Federal law. And while executions might give grisly vent to public frustration, they do nothing to deter the drug dealer on the street who may face death daily.
Meanwhile, Mr. Bush's drug policy director, William Bennett, remained invisible. The former Secretary of Education appeared to have holed up for the six months of study Congress allowed him to prepare a national anti-drug strategy.
Then, last week, the furor over ''high-tech killing machines,'' in the words of Los Angeles Police Chief Darryl Gates, persuaded the California Legislature to approve a ban on assault rifles. And meanwhile, the pace of murder in Washington D.C. has quickened. Mr. Bennett emerged and persuaded the President to drop his rigid opposition to gun control and support a suspension of assault rifle imports.
That won't affect domestic producers. Nor does it eliminate tens of thousands of assault rifles already in private hands. But it does support states moving toward tougher bans, and it inspired a display of responsibility by one domestic manufacturer, Colt Industries, which withdrew its popular assault rifle, the AR-15, from the market.
Mr. Bennett says he'll make Washington D.C. a laboratory for drug policy. That could be constructive - if he follows some basic principles:
The first mission of the police is to take back the streets. Where drug dealers have seized control of neighborhoods, police in New York and elsewhere have succeeded in regaining control with saturation tactics. Invasions of cops make it harder to buy drugs. That discourages new customers and may persuade addicts to seek help.
Drug treatment needs much more money. While there is no sure cure for cocaine addiction, many respond to psychological counseling, sometimes combined with antidepressants, even acupuncture. Most addicts decide at some point to seek treatment, which reduces their drug use at least temporarily. It ought to be available on demand.
The mass media can educate. The effects of drug education programs in schools may not be felt for years; much of the addict population doesn't go to school. Most kids, however, watch television and listen to the radio, and groups like the Media Partnership for a Drug Free America are demonstrating that compelling advertising campaigns can transform attitudes.
A frustrated public clamors for immediate relief that no one knows how to provide. Yet regaining some control over street violence and using treatment and media campaigns to shrink demand are meaningful, achievable goals. The public will appreciate them to the extent it understands the limits of slogans and simple remedies. The drug problem in which Mr. Bennett is now acquiring new expertise also challenges his deeper experience - as a teacher.
Surgeon General C. Everett Koop might welcome evidence that abortions are harmful to women who have them. But much to his credit, he puts professional integrity ahead of political ideology. He therefore recently reiterated to a Congressional committee his belief that there are not enough data to support that conclusion.
He also took the occasion to offer constructive advice for those on all sides of the debate on ways to reduce the abortion rate.
First, he emphasizes sex education. In a world that is past the sexual revolution, young people need useful information to make informed choices about their sexual behavior.
Second, he suggests, American women need greater access to more contraceptive methods. For example, hormone treatments that prevent pregnancy for five years when implanted under the skin are not available here. Furthermore, but for the pill, unsafe for some women, those methods that are available here have substantial failure rates. In 1987 the Alan Guttmacher Institute reported that even if every American who wanted to avoid childbearing practiced birth control faithfully there would be about 500,000 abortions a year.
Dr. Koop also recommends that society subsidize the costs for women who bear rather than abort unplanned children. That's a sensible, humane idea. But why stop at unplanned children? Surely the hoped-for child of a poor parent is as deserving of help as the child conceived in ignorance or carelessness. For starters, Dr. Koop might suggest that Congress make it possible to enroll everyone who qualifies for the WIC (Women-Infants-Children) supplemental food program. At present the program is helping only about 50 percent of those eligible.
Dr. Koop has been eloquent about two of America's most pressing health problems: AIDS and the consequences of smoking. This latest prescription deserves to fall on equally receptive ears.
From 1984 to 1987, the number of low-birthweight babies born in New York City rose notably, in three years erasing a decade of progress. That's another alarming symptom of the crack epidemic in cities across the country.
It is hard enough to secure decent prenatal health care for a poor woman who may not speak English, lacks transportation and doesn't understand the importance of waiting, often for hours, to see a doctor. It is nearly impossible when she has a drug habit. Babies born too small, in trouble already, are especially afflicted if their mothers are crack addicts. Beyond fetal abnormalities associated with cocaine, they may test positive for AIDS antibodies or suffer from syphilis.
Even without those problems, the low-birthweight baby has a clouded future. Most such babies have developmental problems, often severe, that are crushingly expensive to treat. The bill for round-the-clock monitoring in neonatal intensive care runs about $1,000 a day; long stays can cost more than $300,000. Such care costs New York City's hospitals $190 million a year.
In 1983 New York City made a major effort to insure that its babies got proper care before they were born. The city launched an education campaign, expanded prenatal health care services at sites throughout the city and spoke of more aggressive outreach to those women most likely to bear low-birthweight babies - teen-agers and addicts.
The crack epidemic has rendered the programs inadequate. To bring in a substance-abusing woman requires aggressive, sustained outreach - a task that's far beyond the capacities of the 270 social workers, public health nurses and community advocates who are now dispersed to nine high-risk neighborhoods. Working with a woman who needs only to be connected to the right social services takes counseling. Working with a woman on crack takes continuous monitoring, an undertaking that is far more labor-intensive.
More resources for outreach could do much to reduce the $190 million now spent on the results of neglect. Field workers are modestly encouraged to learn that some female addicts decide to seek help when they become pregnant. If they don't get it, the consequences are already clear: more millions needed for more babies with brief, sad lives.
Hell hath no fury like a pesticide scorned, as Rachel Carson discovered when she published ''Silent Spring'' more than a quarter century ago. She was hysterically attacked at the time by the chemical industry as ill-informed, emotional, sensational and altogether off the wall. But none of that made Rachel Carson's conclusions any less valid.
The chemical industry's reaction to ''Silent Spring,'' the tobacco industry's to the first Surgeon General's report on smoking, the agriculture industry's to the banning of DDT -they all are of a piece with the current reaction of the pesticide industry's apologists to the latest disclosure: By the Government's own standards, children are shown to be at unacceptable risk from exposure to pesticide residue on the fruits and vegetables they most heavily consume.
The report that has evoked so furious a response was produced by the Natural Resources Defense Council, a not-for-profit legal and scientific environmental organization. For years, the council has been vainly attempting to persuade the Environmental Protection Agency to take a tougher stand in enforcing and tightening its own pesticide-control regulations.
Largely using the Government's figures, the report shows on the basis of a two-year study (subjected to peer review by an independent panel) that children are at ''intolerable risk'' from a wide variety of potentially lethal chemicals that they ingest in legally permissible quantity.
The pesticide Alar (daminozide) has received the most attention because it is widely used by apple growers. It is considered so potentially dangerous that the E.P.A. itself admits that it wouldn't be allowed at all under E.P.A. rules if it were coming onto the market today. But, like many other of the 23 pesticides examined in this study, its permissible use predates the current regulatory process and therefore is, bureaucratically, much more difficult to annul.
The average pre-schooler's exposure to this carcinogen is estimated to result in a cancer risk ''240 times greater than the cancer risk considered acceptable by E.P.A. following a full lifetime of exposure.''
The risk estimates for pre-schoolers from other less deadly pesticides ''are approximately two to seven times what E.P.A. considers acceptable following a full lifetime of exposure.''
Because pre-schoolers eat so much more fruit than adults, relative to weight, and consume such large quantities of fruit likely to be contaminated, they have relatively much greater exposure to pesticide residues.
Yet, says the report, ''the pre-schoolers' maximum legally permissible exposure to many pesticides is hundreds of times higher than the level that E.P.A. considers safe.''
The E.P.A. is crippled by inadequate and outdated regulations, failure to take account of the special problems inherent in children's diet and bureaucratic reluctance to move in innovative ways when the situation demands.
It is imperative now that Congress clarify the lines of authority of both the E.P.A. and the Food and Drug Administration, requiring much tighter, more effective and more expeditious controls and enforcement.
The more rabid - and political -critics of the report see in it, or pretend to see in it, a sinister, subversive plot to undermine the public health services, to catapult an imaginary ''Green'' party into power or perhaps even to destroy the agro-capitalist system of the United States.
Congess can afford to dismiss such nightmarish nonsense, but it cannot afford any longer to ignore the serious public interest in rectifying what has now been exposed as a grotesque lapse in protection of the public health.
Income tax time brings a new round of agitation from older Americans upset about the new Medicare law, which collects premiums for expanded coverage in the form of an income tax surcharge. The complaints are based more on confusion than injustice.
Medicare used to cover only a limited number of days in the hospital. The new law will pay for ''catastrophic'' care - unlimited stays. Eventually it will also pay more on doctor bills, and pick up some prescription drugs.
More than half the 32 million elderly Americans covered by the program will pay no more than $48 a year in additional premiums for these extra benefits. But some people - the most affluent - complain because they have to pay more, up to $800 a year for the wealthiest.
Their objections fall into three categories:
Benefits haven't been expanded enough.
Only a small percentage of the elderly will ever need to be hospitalized for very long at a time, the critics say, so covering unlimited hospital stays is of slight value. But insurance buys peace of mind as well as tangible benefits. Otherwise why insure a house against the rare fire?
Others protest that expanded payments to doctors cap the amount an individual will pay only according to the Medicare-approved schedules of doctor's fees. Many doctors charge more. And some people on Medicare complain that coverage for catastrophic illness doesn't include nursing home care.
Both points are true but irrelevant. Washington will have to address soaring doctors' fees and nursing home costs, but the new Medicare wasn't intended to do either.
Many people already have private coverage duplicating that of the new law. Some features of the new law do indeed duplicate ''Medigap'' policies. But once the coverage for drugs and doctors' fees is phased in, few private policies will be able to keep up. Critics say that many retirees are covered by Medigap plans provided by their former employers, for which they now pay nothing. That avoids an unpleasant fact: Most employee retirement health plans are unfunded.
Employers are required by law to set aside money to cover their future liability for pensions, but not for health benefits. The unfunded liability for current retirees totals $85 billion, and health costs are rising fast. The unfunded amount for those not yet retired may be $2 trillion. As a result, corporations are re-examining health plans, and benefits may not remain in place even for those who now believe they are fully covered.
Progressive financing isn't fair. Originally, Medicare was intended as an entitlement equally for rich and poor. Progressive financing in the new law marks a historic shift - to an honorable principle enshrined in the income tax: The affluent are expected to pay at a higher rate than the poor.
In any case, even those who must contribute the most under the new law are net beneficiaries. Medicare coverage is so valuable that the typical client will receive a public subsidy of $2,024 this year. Those paying the full $800 surtax still benefit from a subsidy of $719.
It's understandable that people accustomed to subsidized health care will complain when they must pay something for new benefits. But that's no reason for the rest of us, now paying heavy payroll taxes to support the subsidy, to be misled.
In New York as elsewhere, drug abuse and AIDS are creating chaos in urban hospitals -enough to threaten not only the quality of life but life itself. That forces urgent, painful decisions on strapped city and state governments. If the need for action is desperate, so is the need for careful planning and administrative ingenuity.
For some years city hospitals have suffered as more and more of the poor, lacking access to any other health care, use the emergency room as family doctor. Hospitals also suffer from a severe nursing shortage. But the twin evils of drugs and AIDS are pushing them to the brink.
Drug addicts are subject to diseases like pneumonia, hepatitis and tuberculosis that require hospital care. By far the most devastating is AIDS, now transmitted as commonly in New York by addicts' needle-sharing as by sex. On any given day, some 1,700 hospital beds, about 6 percent of the total, are occupied by AIDS patients, and a mayoral task force estimates that the figure will double by 1994. The group states: ''The paralysis of New York's whole hospital system . . . has now become a disastrous but real possibility.''
In response, hospitals are campaigning for more resources, and Governor Cuomo recently called for increases in health insurance reimbursements that would yield $193 million for hospitals to recruit more nurses. That's a sensible step. Hundreds of hospital beds currently are unusable because there aren't enough nurses.
The question of building more hospital space remains clouded. For several years, state officials have resisted, believing, with good reason, that improved hospital management could free up many beds. But that position becomes harder to maintain as the AIDS caseload grows. Both the mayoral task force and the foundation-supported Citizens Commission on AIDS argue for adding some 2,000 acute-care beds over the next four years.
There is broad agreement on the need for other space - nursing homes and other housing set up to offer some health services - to take the pressure off the hospitals. It's estimated currently that more than 100 AIDS patients in hospital beds on any given day do not need full hospital care, and their number is expected to grow rapidly. Additional hundreds of the aged are in hospitals for want of nursing homes. Thus the Mayor's task force calls for at least 1,500 new nursing-home beds and 2,500 more health-service housing units.
Health officials lament the difficulty of building such facilities. But Andrew Cuomo, the Governor's son and president of a nonprofit organization that has succeeded with housing for homeless families, recently negotiated $8.4 million in tax-exempt bond financing through the state's Medical Care Facilities Financing Agency for AIDS patient housing. It will cost only $225 per person per day to operate the 66-bed facility, including debt service on construction, compared with $700 per day in a hospital.
His example deserves emulation. New York's hospital crisis demands hard choices - and cost-effective compassion.
Each day this year, Americans will spend $200 million more on health care than they did last year. At the year's end, the total will be $620 billion, up from $550 billion in 1988. And in less than two years, America will break the $2-billion-a-day barrier in health-care spending.
Most troubling, the evidence is now overwhelming that at least 25 percent of the money Americans spend on health care is wasted. And those wasted billions would be more than enough to fill the gaps and provide all the health- and long-term care our people need.
After a decade of trench warfare over health-care costs, shell-shocked combatants - hospital administrators, doctors, nurses, insurers, employers, government bureaucrats, politicians and patients - have a sense of winning some battles, but losing the war.
The battles won have not been insignificant. Medicare's system of paying hospitals pre-set amounts based on the patient's ailment rather than picking up whatever tabs hospitals submit has cut admissions and lengths of stay. Since enacting this change in 1983, Medicare has logged savings of at least $25 billion. From 1982 through 1988, Chrysler, a cost-containment warrior, spent $1.3 billion less for health care than it would have if its costs had risen at the same rate they did for business generally.
That's the good news for taxpayers and Chrysler shareholders. The bad news for taxpayers is that Medicare spending is rising so rapidly it will top $600 billion and the cost of Social Security just after the year 2000. The bad news for Chrysler shareholders is that the company's 14 percent hike in 1988 health-care costs was more than triple the rise in the consumer price index.
With cost pressures so great and results so mixed, it was inevitable that some health-care buyers would invoke the specter of rationing and triage. Oregon and Alameda County, Calif., have drawn up plans to ration care for the poor.
Others scramble to shift health-care costs to someone else. The Feds dump more Medicaid costs for poor patients on states, and more health-care costs for elderly retirees on large employers. Employers, frustrated by diminishing returns on their managed-care plans, dump costs on their workers and retirees. Insurers try to dump costs back on the Federal Government.
But wallowing in the despair of rationing and tossing the hot potato of costs to the next guy are unconscionable cop-outs. This year, we are spending $155 billion for tests and treatments that will have little or no impact on the patients involved, including at least 30 billion taxpayer dollars.
What are we buying for all those millions?
Ridiculously excessive hospital capacity.
Hospital occupancy rates have been hovering at just over 60 percent nationally for the last three years. Despite the unprecedented pressures of excess capacity that would force any other business to cut back, close down or slash prices, between 1981 and 1987, the number of hospital beds increased by 21,000. And in 1988, hospital room prices jumped more than 10 percent, the largest boost since 1982.
When hospitals do close, they're often the wrong ones, like those in underserved inner cities. Moreover, when a city hospital is full, it is often with AIDS victims or substance abusers, who could be more humanely and effectively treated in less expensive hospices or treatment centers. Millions of unnecessary procedures.
There is growing consensus that half the coronary bypasses, most Cesarian sections and a significant proportion of many other procedures such as pacemaker implants and hysterectomies are unnecessary. A former editor of the Journal of the American Medical Association is convinced that more than half of the 40 million medical tests performed each day ''do not really contribute to a patient's diagnosis or therapy.''
A medical malpractice protection racket.
In 1987, doctors and hospitals paid at least $8 billion in malpractice insurance premiums. In Florida, obstetricians paid premiums of $153,000; in Long Island, they paid $95,000. Malpractice insurance costs for each baby delivered were $921 in Florida, $572 in New York and $448 in Oregon. Less than half of these premium dollars ever get to injured patients; almost 60 percent of them go to lawyers, insurers and the courts.
Moreover, insurance premiums are the smallest part of the cost of our medical malpractice system. To protect themselves in case of a lawsuit, doctors perform millions of useless tests and procedures, at an annual cost estimated at $20 billion.
Frenetic and increasingly expensive, paper and computer chases.
America's health care system is the world's most expensive to administer. The proliferation of efforts to track and screen for abuse every patient, procedure and prescription has made it more important for doctors and hospital administrators to master accounting and regulatory manipulation than to master medicine.
What aren't we buying for all those millions?
We are not buying better health care.
The $2,500 we'll spend this year for each man, woman and child in the U.S. is 50 percent more than will be spent in the next highest-spending nation, Canada; more than twice that in Japan and almost triple that in Britain. Yet each of these nations had lower infant mortality rates and similar longevity.
The quality of care is declining in half-empty hospitals where doctors and nurses do not perform surgical procedures often enough to maintain proficiency, much less attain excellence. And needlessly exposing patients to risky procedures can hardly be considered better care.
We are not buying care for our neediest citizens.
From 1981 to 1988, while the cost of Medicaid more than doubled, to $55 billion, the number of people participating remained unchanged at 22 million. And America's enormous expenditures do not buy health care for some 37 million uninsured citizens, most of whom work or are dependents of workers.
We are not buying public satisfaction.
A recent survey found that 89 percent of Americans believe the health care system needs fundamental change.
We are not buying the freedom to choose any doctor or hospital we wish.
The free choice era of American medicine is drawing to an end. In 1984, 85 percent of all employee coverage was by unmanaged fee-for-service plans that afforded the employee wide open choice of any health care provider; by 1988, only 28 percent of those employees enjoyed such freedom. What can we do? Subject patients only to treatments that work.
It's time for a rigorous effort to establish what procedures produce beneficial outcomes under what conditions. That means leadership and funding from Medicare; support from the Congress for the bills of Senator George Mitchell and Representative Bill Gradison to invest up to $350 million in such research; and cooperation from America's physicians.
Revamp the medical malpractice system.
Medical professionals should be held accountable for negligence and incompetence, but not for disappointment and grief over events only God can control. States should limit the amount of financial recovery to modest payment for pain and suffering (as California has), link legal damages to costs of health care and compensation for lost income and lingering disability and sharply reduce contingent legal fees. Federal Medicaid contributions to states should be conditioned on reform of medical malpractice. Take better care of ourselves. Two-thirds of all disease and premature death is preventable, but only if we as individuals recognize our responsibility to take care of ourselves. The priorities are obvious: quit smoking, stick to proper diet, control drinking, exercise, learn to handle stress and take preventive measures such as regular checkups.
Apply caps, limits and pricing across the board.
Employers have been burned too often by Medicare and Medicaid savings schemes that allow hospitals and doctors to recoup lost revenues by performing more procedures on private payers and charging them higher prices.
Merely shifting health-care costs from government to employers does not reduce total costs, and makes it even more difficult for American industry to compete in the world marketplace.
In 1988, Chrysler spent $700 on employee health care for each vehicle manufactured - twice as much as French and West German automakers and three times as much as the Japanese. It's no wonder that many large corporations are becoming more sympathetic to national health plan proposals.
The alternatives to action on these fronts is a grim future. Many workers and retirees will lose their employer-based coverage or have it drastically reduced; Medicare beneficiaries will wait in line for lower-quality care; millions of citizens will continue to be denied access to basic health care; and only the wealthiest Americans will be able to afford long-term care.
This future is not a fantasy and it's not far away. Fortunately, the money needed to avoid it is already allocated to health care. We need only spend that money wisely. If we do, we can provide higher quality health care for all our citizens at the same price we're now paying to provide a declining quality of care for only some.
This is a man of great power, lying just over there. His wealth, almost beyond counting, has brought him planes and yachts, the friendship of presidents and kings, and mile upon mile of exquisite estate countryside.
Now his world has shrunk to this corner of the emergency room. The only important people in the world are the young resident bending over him and the nurse preparing the intravenous. Nobody on the staff knows anything about him except that he is ill and has trouble breathing, nor would they care if they did.
In the middle of the night, he was struck with frightening pain. Like hundreds of other people in pain that night and every night in the year, his lifeline stretched from his telephone to ambulance to emergency room. This one was at University Hospital, now The Tisch Hospital, on First Avenue in Manhattan.
My wife and I were with his wife beyond the bedside curtain. Every bed and chair around us and in the corridors was occupied by somebody in need of help. A man with a knife wound, sewn up but still oozing blood, was nearby on a cot, his arm over his eyes.
In a few hours, medication and close attention helped our friend to breathe easy. Recovered, he was driven home, and we rode with him.
About two months later, I was back in the same emergency room in the middle of the night. This time it was I who was in pain, needed help and got it.
That was in 1987. I told myself I would write about the hospitals of the city but never did. Now any New Yorker who pushes the hospitals out of his mind except when he needs them is not only ungrateful but a fool.
Our hospitals are in emergency situation but not getting the care and attention they need. It is beyond crisis, approaching disaster.
The emergency rooms are choking. Sometimes they become so full they have to close their doors and try to shunt all but obvious life-and-death cases away.
And every single day, emergency room patients in some hospitals -sometimes all of them - have to wait days to move upstairs from the emergency room to regular care in a regular bed. Days on stretchers or cots, or huddled on chairs or pacing the floor, in a bathrobe.
At Bellevue, the great municipal hospital that deals with about 30,000 inpatients and hundreds of thousands of others in its clinics a year, it can take from one to five days to get a hospital bed. Things are about the same, or worse, in most of the other 15 municipal hospitals.
Of course, many people in this city never see the inside of a municipal hospital. Their doctors get them into other hospitals, and they tend to think of the municipals with a shudder.
I spent many boyhood months in a huge, stinking charity ward in New York. I suppose that is why I avoided hospitals and writing about them.
I am told things are better now, and certainly Bellevue has one of the finest staffs in the country. But better or not, people with even a little money try to avoid the municipal hospitals when they are sick.
But nobody in this city can avoid the rolling waves of the hospital crisis.
The municipals simply cannot handle all the drug cases, all the AIDS cases, all the homeless. The ''voluntary'' hospitals have to take a bigger share of those cases, and the result is citywide hospital gridlock.
A major politician told me the other day what real clout means - getting hospital space fast for a constituent or friend.
What went wrong? We failed to deal with our problems and dumped them on our hospitals.
Hundreds of thousands of drug-related cases swirl in and out of the hospitals. Homeless patients by the thousands have to be kept longer than their illness requires - and return again and again.
AIDS patients who often need long hospitalization do not have decent separate hospital facilities. Psychiatric patients keep returning because the states gave them shots of tranquilizers, sent them out into the streets - and closed the psychiatric wards behind them to save a dollar.
Hospitals are not to blame, nor patients. The city failed them, and the state, and the Federal Government, and every single politician who did not fight for the money, and every single taxpayer who then voted for that politician.
I think Americans have the right to expect a decent bed to be waiting when they are wheeled through a hospital door. If we do not demand that and get it, the shame is ours.
Even when I was a boy walking into that hospital to go into that ward, nobody told me I could not have a bed -nobody said that.
ON MY MIND
America may be the richest country in the world but its infant mortality rate still lags shamefully. The National Commission to Prevent Infant Mortality, headed by former Senator Lawton Chiles, offers a sensible program for improvement.
Medical care, the commission says, isn't all that's needed by poor pregnant women to produce healthy children. They need social support too, during and after pregnancy, from health care professionals or trained workers from their community.
The commission points to a special program involving 350 pregnant women in Elmira, N.Y. All the women received prenatal care, and half also received twice-monthly home visits from nurses. The group receiving the visits had healthier pregnancies with fewer complications and premature deliveries. The babies of the youngest mothers weighed more than those in the comparison group. The commission also would provide all pregnant women and new mothers with a handbook offering basic health information and a place to enter a comprehensive health record. The mother will know, for instance, when to get a child vaccinated; a new pediatrician will know the basic health history.
Another sensible idea: situating together all the health services poor women and children are apt to need in order to make possible ''one-stop shopping'' for health care. And the group would set up a nationwide toll-free telephone number that pregnant women can call for health care referrals.
The commission's proposals are contained in the Healthy Birth Act of 1989, now before Congress and estimated to cost about $100 million in its first year. It may be cheap at twice the price.
For years, travelers to Florence have believed it was the Italian water that made them go funny all over -faint, hallucinate, perspire heavily, suffer palpitations and stomach cramps. Today, because of the researches of a psychiatrist named Graziella Magherini, the world knows better. It wasn't the acqua; it was the art.
Dr. Magherini and her assistants have put together a study of 107 people who actually seemed to go slightly mad over Michelangelo, batty over Brunelleschi, crazy in the face of too many Caravaggios. Most were single, between the ages of 26 and 40 (always a tricky time) and traveling alone.
Their eyes, it seems, were bigger than their bellies. Overstuffed with Madonnas, finger-pointing saints and winged cherubs, they eventually collapsed with one or another variety of psychic indigestion. The pain, however, wasn't permanent. All recovered with a few days' rest.
Dr. Magherini's study, ''The Stendhal Syndrome'' (in 1817 the novelist was made very queasy by the frescoes in the Church of Santa Croce), arrives just in time for the tourist season. Those travelers who'd rather sit down and twirl pasta than stroll through a museum need no longer curse their esthetic inertia.
They're not Philistines; on the contrary, they're saving their health.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
With only two members dissenting, a Senate committee last week voted to bar airlines from refusing blind passengers seats in rows with emergency exits. That substitutes misguided compassion for common sense.
Sponsored by Senator Ernest Hollings, chairman of the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, the new legislation thrusts Congress into the midst of a long-running dispute that had been focused on the Federal Aviation Administration.
Earlier this year the agency proposed a new rule barring from emergency exit rows people who might have trouble leading an evacuation. That would include not only the blind but the obese, those with small children, the aged and others.
Currently each airline makes its own rules, and these have occasionally led to confrontations between flight crews and those who defend the rights of the blind. The advocates say the blind ought to be free to sit where they want and that emergency seating rules are discriminatory. But there is discrimination and there is discrimination. The F.A.A. proposal addresses a valid safety interest of the airlines and all their passengers. Should an evacuation be necessary, those sitting next to exits must perform a series of crucial steps to save their own lives and those of others who follow them out of the plane's cabin.
Spokesmen for the National Federation of the Blind claim that the aviation agency's own studies show blindness is no impediment. But the agency says that just isn't so.
''While  [ a 1987 review of research ]  included some reports of successful, rapid evacuation by persons with disabilities,'' the agency said in support of its proposed new rule, ''the reports show rather dramatically that certain factors generally impede rapid evacuation'' - including blindness. The agency points out that it is one thing to exit a plane rapidly, another to lead an evacuation.
Unreasoning insistence on a right that defies logic and common sense does no service to the blind, or to anyone else.
Section 89 of the tax code, little known to the public, has become a famous horror for employers. Its purpose is simple enough: to regulate taxation of health insurance provided by employers. But along the way, Section 89 got ferociously complex. Corporations growled. Some even dropped health insurance entirely rather than put up with the hassle of dealing with the Internal Revenue Service. Then the Treasury Department wisely postponed enforcement until Oct. 1.
Chairman Dan Rostenkowski of the House Ways and Means Committee proposes changing Section 89 to solve the problems permanently. His bill is good. With one change, it would be excellent.
Congress exempted medical fringe benefits from income tax because it judged that otherwise, too few workers would be insured. The problem was that many firms offered lavish plans to higher-level employees but little or nothing to ordinary workers. In 1986, Congress responded with Section 89. Its non-discrimination provisions required that health insurance for high-paid workers be taxed unless low-paid workers received comparable coverage.
But that principle brought endless questions: What constitutes a comparable plan? What if many low-paid workers reject insurance because, for instance, they are already covered under their spouse's plan? Section 89 piled on provisions to accommodate a multitude of contingencies. Compliance became a nightmare.
Mr. Rostenkowski recommends two changes. First, firms would only need to offer affordable health insurance plans to their workers. Acceptance is unnecessary. Second, to insure non-discrimination, medical fringe benefits for high-paid workers would be taxed to the extent that they exceed 133 percent of the benefits offered low-paid workers. These provisions are simple and would work. The crisis of complexity can now be solved. But it's too soon to raise all three cheers. The Rostenkowski bill has a serious shortcoming.
To see why, it's helpful to start from first principles. Exempting fringe benefits from taxes has a flimsy rationale. If Joe pays his own day care bill, it's with earnings on which he has paid income tax. But if Joe's employer pays the bill, the ''income'' is tax-free. Where's the equity in that? The unfairness is even more troubling because a dollar of exempt fringe benefits lowers taxes more for higher-paid than low-paid workers.
If Congress insists on subsidizing fringe benefits, let it at least do so in a fair, low-cost manner. Under the Rostenkowski plan, a company could still offer fabulous tax-free health insurance as long as it included all its regular workers. Never mind that taxpayers outside the company would have to make up for the loss to the Treasury.
Congress could limit abuse with one simple provision: a dollar limit on the tax exemption. Workers would still get health insurance, but the drain on the Treasury would be limited. If capping the benefit caused companies to eliminate health insurance entirely, Congress could require them to provide medical fringe benefits.
Alain Enthoven of Stanford University provides an additional argument for limiting both the amount and type of employer-provided health insurance. Under current plans, even high-paid employees pay little of their medical bills. No wonder hospitals and doctors can raise fees with little resistance. By overly insulating patients from medical costs, tax law contributes to skyrocketing prices. Mr. Rostenkowski's proposal ignores this problem. He solves the immediate uproar over Section 89. But he stops one step short.
Lucky is the poor black woman who is pregnant in Mississippi rather than in New York. She is three times more likely to receive early prenatal care.
Thousands of poor women in New York are denied federally funded prenatal and infant care because of a standoff over abortion. Governor Cuomo and legislative leaders bear a heavy responsibility to end the impasse.
Three years ago, Congress passed a law providing Federal Medicaid funds for prenatal and infant care of women and children with incomes up to 185 percent of the poverty level. Under Medicaid, states that want the new Federal money must match it with their own.
Some 43 states have already applied for the new money. But not New York, where the issue has become entangled in a debate over abortion. Federal law bars any use of Federal Medicaid funds for abortions, but states have the option of paying for abortions with their own funds. That is how the law works in New York for the existing Medicaid program.
But what about the new expanded program? The Democratic Assembly won't consider any bill that would deny state money for abortion to the newly eligible women. The Republican Senate won't consider a bill that doesn't exclude them from Medicaid-funded abortions. As a result, some 70,000 poor mothers and babies are denied money for prenatal and infant health care.
That deadlock could be broken if Governor Cuomo were to revive an initiative he undertook two years ago that basically accepts the Senate position. New York State would continue to fund abortions for women with incomes up to 100 percent of the poverty level, but the added group with more income would receive Medicaid funding only for prenatal care, not for abortions.
Such a solution won't please those who believe that abortions should be included in all prena-tal care paid for with state Medicaid funds. But legislators will have other chances to change their minds - a baby has only one chance at a healthy birth.
A spokesman for the Governor says it would be futile to push a bill that would be ''dead on arrival.'' Without that bill, however, some young New Yorkers may be dead on arrival, too.
The good news about AIDS is that useful treatments are at last becoming available. No cure is in sight, but it now seems that the drug pentamidine can avert the pneumonia that often kills those infected. That raises a vexed issue, which has sparked debate at the current AIDS conference in Montreal. How can those who don't know they are infected be reached with news of the new treatments?
There's a strong case for replacing the present system of anonymous testing with mandatory reporting of new infections, and vigorous contact tracing of sexual and needle-sharing partners.
Dr. Stephen Joseph, the New York City Health Commissioner, has created a stir with this proposal. Gay advocates object that any departure from the present system of anonymous testing would deter people from getting themselves tested. They note that the city already fails to provide proper medical care to those now identified as infected; what is the point in violating individual privacy and adding more names to the list of untreated?
But the inadequacy of the city's health care system is a separate issue. Mandatory reporting of infection would indeed deter some people from being tested, but the increasing value of new treatments weighs heavily on the other side of the scale.
The epidemic has changed since anonymous testing began. In New York, AIDS has stabilized among the gay community but rages among intravenous drug abusers and their families. Gay men have long known how to avoid infection. Mandatory reporting and contact tracing would have been of little benefit when there was nothing to offer but familiar advice.
Matters are quite different among addicts. Many women partners of addicts don't realize how much they are at risk. And some 1,800 children are born each year to infected mothers in New York City. With treatments becoming available, there is the strongest possible case for reaching into communities where addiction is high. Requiring doctors to report new infections, and instituting aggressive but voluntary contact tracing, would save lives.
Such a policy needs to be followed with funds to offer treatment and a Federal law forbidding discrimination against those infected. That those steps are not already in place is no argument against taking the first step. Dr. Joseph is right to raise the issue, and the more new treatments become available, the stronger his case will be.
What a mockery these latest Supreme Court decisions make of this nation's pretensions to be the leading proponent of human rights!
Executing teen-agers and individuals with the mental capacity of children, putting the indigent to death without exhaustive attention to their appeals, speeding state killings by short-cutting long-established rules -these are procedures rightly to be condemned when they occur in the Soviet Union, China, South Africa, or anywhere. Yet the Supreme Court tells us that they are sanctioned by the Constitution of the United States.
Almost lost in the sound and fury resulting from the Supreme Court's flag-burning decision, for example, was another 5-to-4 holding of greater practical impact. States are not constitutionally required, the Court said, to provide counsel for penniless death-row inmates who continue their appeals in state courts.
Now the justices follow that ruling with further 5-to-4 decisions that youths who were only 16 and 17 years old when they committed crimes, as well as the mentally retarded, may be executed. In their reach and effect, all these decisions dwarf the flag case, the primary impact of which is only on people's emotions, and which will have little effect on the course of actual events. The flag, after all, is only a symbol - cherished, of course, but a symbol nevertheless and one desecrated and cheapened far more often by sleazy commercial and political exploitation than by some impassioned person burning it in protest.
A majority, unfortunately, does not exist among this Court's nine members that is equally farsighted and courageous on the very real question of the state's power to take the lives of its own citizens. Instead, in several decisions, the Court has narrowed the grounds on which defendants condemned to death can appeal and limited the means by which such appeals may be pursued.
A wiser Court found in 1972 that the death penalty was unconstitutional because of the arbitrary and capricious manner in which it was then administered. There's no evidence whatever that the new state laws that led the Court to reinstate capital punishment in 1976 have removed or even limited the caprice and arbitrariness; indeed, last week's ruling on appeals upheld one of these random inequities. Yet, the Court goes on devising or approving new procedures by which more people may be executed.
Even those who were legally children when the crimes for which they were convicted were committed now may be put to death constitutionally, along with the most hardened and irredeemable criminals. In the Court's view, a sufficient ''national consensus'' that such young people should be spared does not exist because only 12 of the 37 states that sanction the death penalty bar it for those who were under 18 when they committed a capital crime, and 3 bar it for those under 17. Nor is there ''yet'' such a consensus, in the Court's opinion, for sparing the mentally retarded.
If 19 states, just over half of the 37, banned the execution of under-age criminals, would that constitute a consensus? Would what is constitutional today become unconstitutional tomorrow, in that case? Is the Supreme Court of the United States a poll-taker or a head-counter rather than a judicial body solemnly charged with the power to interpret the Constitution?
What a cruel document that Constitution must be, in the stony eyes of the Court majority - the same five justices in all these cases. Last week, they said nothing in it required any state to provide counsel for indigent death-row inmates appealing beyond a first direct appeal in state court. Yet, more than 60 percent of later appeals from capital sentences in Federal courts have been successful. Last year, the Supreme Court itself heard 10 such cases and ruled seven times in favor of the appellant.
From so many successful appeals, the Court might logically have drawn the inference that death sentences in trial court often are improper. Instead, it chose to make it harder for the courts to hear, and in many cases to accept, the last desperate appeals of condemned persons - at least some of whom will have been wrongly convicted or sentenced.
Now the Court finds nothing in the Constitution, not even its prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment, to prevent the execution of teen-agers, or of adults with the mentality of children. What a harsh and merciless reading of a document written primarily to protect citizens against the powers of the state!
IN THE NATION
Determined to get on with the execution of murderers, the Supreme Court barely paused before deciding, by a pitifully close 5-to-4 majority, that 16 is not too young nor the bottom 2 percent of the population too feeble-minded to be eligible for the death penalty. That's not ''cruel and unusual'' punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment, said the majority.
The Court frequently surveys the laws of states to measure ''evolving standards of decency.'' In this case, the Court failed to identify the growing consensus against executing juveniles or to give greater recognition of the rarity of executing the retarded. Just as the Court intends, the burden shifts to the states that maintain capital punishment to make clear their minimum standards.
Society is unquestionably justified to deal harshly with murderers like Kevin Stanford, a 17-year-old from Kentucky, and Keith Wilkins, a 16-year-old from Missouri. But is executing criminals of that age cruel?
Last year, in finding a 15-year-old murderer too young to die, the Court noted that every state that specified a minimum age set it at 16 or above. The pattern is more checkered for slightly older youths. It was enough for the majority that only 12 of the 37 states that permit capital punishment specify a minimum death age of 18, while 3 more specify 17, and 22 states don't specify. But had the majority wished to be merciful, it could as readily have done the arithmetic differently: counting the 13 states without the death penalty, half the states refuse to execute anyone under 18.
Justice John Paul Stevens argued cogently in dissent for a broader view. There are other objective standards. The preponderant minimum age for voting, for military service, for marriage without parental consent, for service on a jury, all are telling indications of what the states consider readiness for the privileges and responsibilities of adulthood. And why not give some weight to Congress's decision last year to make 18 the minimum death age for murderers in drug cases?
While only two states flatly prohibit executing the retarded, most states at least allow juries to consider mental retardation as a factor mitigating against a death sentence. Not Texas, which leads the nation in executions partly because its death law precludes most considerations of mercy.
Fortunately for the Court's reputation, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor broke from the death majority long enough to cast a deciding vote for injecting mercy considerations into Texas law. It was a rare, welcome example of the Supreme Court working to identify and enforce those ''evolving standards of decency.''
The AIDS epidemic is far from over. But the toll of new cases, which has been rising for years, may at last be about to level off and then decline. Gloomier numbers released this week by the General Accounting Office mask the possibility that the epidemic's worst rages may be abating.
The G.A.O. study argues that AIDS cases are now under-reported, the true toll being a third higher. Thus total cases by the end of 1991 could reach 300,000 to 480,000, higher than the 285,000 cases projected by the Federal Centers for Disease Control. Representative Henry Waxman, who commissioned the study, cites the new figures to urge more money for AIDS research and health care.
Mr. Waxman draws attention to the new figures in a just cause. But more important for the future shape of the epidemic is the number of new infections. In certain major groups, these seem to be leveling off. If so, the epidemic will peak, and maybe sooner than many forecasters expect. The reason is that the disease is still very largely confined to specific risk groups. Once all susceptible members are infected, the numbers of new victims will decline.
There are already signs of that. The rate of new infections among homosexual men in New York and San Francisco has dropped sharply since 1983, and among white gay men in New York it is now less than 1 percent. Among New York addicts, the proportion infected seems to have stabilized at 50 to 60 percent since 1984. New addicts are still being infected, but in numbers that are offset by those who die of the disease.
Since infection precedes overt disease by five years or so, a decline in infection will be followed five years later by a drop in new cases. Thus cases among gay men in New York should level off soon, though the C.D.C.'s new and wider definition of AIDS may mask any plateau for some months.
The AIDS virus can be heterosexually transmitted to the regular partners of bisexual men and addicts, but is generally not spreading beyond these groups. The evidence comes from interviewing first-time blood donors and people attending sexual disease clinics. In almost all cases, those infected with the virus turn out to be gay, addicted or the sexual partners of those who are.
A disquieting exception to this trend has appeared recently in the South Bronx, where 15 percent of infected people at a sexual disease clinic had no known risk factor. But many had used crack. With the sale of drugs for sex in crack houses, there has been an outbreak of diseases like syphilis, which may foster spread of the AIDS virus through sores that break the skin. Heavy use of crack in a community with many infected drug users could sustain the epidemic among its heterosexuals.
The national caseload of AIDS is the sum of many separate epidemics that started at different times in different cities. If drug abusers in other cities become infected at the same 50 percent rate as in New York, the virus has many new victims awaiting it. But in Los Angeles and Seattle, for instance, the proportion of addicts infected has stayed at about 15 percent. Unless the crack epidemic spreads or some new population becomes susceptible, it's reasonable to hope that the AIDS plague will at least level off in the next few years.
Advocates for people with AIDS sometimes accept good news badly; steadily rising tolls are such a powerful argument for new resources. When New York City Health Commissioner Stephen Joseph last year halved the estimated number of infected New Yorkers, from 400,000 to 200,000, he met with more rage than relief.
The epidemic is terrifying enough without playing politics with the numbers. The more directly prevention can be targeted at those most at risk -notably black and Hispanic gay men, intravenous drug addicts, crack users and their communities -the sooner the deadly tide will be turned.
Congress threatens an ill-considered overreaction to angry critics of the new Medicare catastrophic health insurance. In fact, the insurance program requires only minor adjustments.
Catastrophic insurance, which began in January, reimburses Medicare beneficiaries for large hospital, doctor and outpatient drug bills. To pay for the program, Congress raised monthly fees for Medicare Part B, the program that now covers a portion of physician and outpatient costs. In order to subsidize the insurance for poorer people, Congress also imposed a surtax on elderly taxpayers.
The more affluent, who pay the largest tax, are bitterly opposed. Why, they ask, should they be the only taxpayers to subsidize low-income elderly? They also point out, correctly, that the surtax is now expected to generate a surplus that hadn't been anticipated.
Congress has three options: to end the surtax; to make the program voluntary; to cut premiums and the surtax to reduce the projected surplus.
End the Surtax? Upper-income families don't need or deserve subsidies for medical insurance. Yet Medicare heavily subsidizes even the wealthiest families. An elderly person with a $40,000 income will pay, on average, for only 67 percent of the Medicare benefits received during his lifetime -even after paying the surtax. Persons with lower income receive substantially higher subsidies. The surtax does not unfairly tax the affluent. It only diminishes their hefty Medicare subsidy. There is no reason to change that policy.
Make It Voluntary? Allowing the healthiest and wealthiest to drop catastrophic insurance would force up rates for the rest. To avoid this dilemma, Senator Lloyd Bentsen ponders offering enrollees the specious choice of forgoing catastrophic insurance by giving up all Medicare Part B coverage. Part B is heavily subsidized; few would opt out. But by linking it to catastrophic in this way, Senator Bentsen would force enrollees to think harder about benefits and costs. That is a sure way to undermine belligerence.
Reduce premiums? The Congressional Budget Office now estimates that over the next five years catastrophic insurance will generate about $2 billion more than the law requires. But five-year projections are notoriously inaccurate, especially for new programs.
There is still room for maneuver. All Congress needs to do is to set Medicare premiums every year rather than every five years, as is done now. With that flexibility, Congress could cut premiums and control surpluses without long-term risk.
Catastrophic insurance was no mistake. What it needs now is yearly tuning, not panicky retreat.
The second year of Gov. Mario Cuomo's Decade of the Child has been remarkably productive in terms of new laws. Even though the New York Legislature's session was shadowed by the need to close an enormous budget gap, the Governor won enactment of important parts of his program to enhance the life chances of poor children. He and the lawmakers who cooperated with him all deserve praise.
In the widest-reaching advance, the Legislature approved Mr. Cuomo's proposed 15 percent increase in New York's basic welfare grant. That will make no one rich - a New York City family of three will net only about $27 more each month. But it ought to ease at least a little the lives of children who depend on public aid to survive.
The legislators also approved stringent child-support standards, pegging payment levels to parental incomes rather than to a theoretical - and stingy - estimate of children's needs. Passed over fierce opposition by trial lawyers, the law should increase overall support payments and free some divorced women and their children from welfare.
A three-year deadlock had to be broken to permit passage of a third important piece of children's legislation: expanding prenatal care under the Medicaid program to women and children in families with incomes up to 185 percent of the poverty level. Currently, the poverty level is $10,060 for a family of three. Even at 185 percent ($18,611), that family is still far below median income in the state. This program is part of an intelligent and long-overdue response to the problem of rising infant mortality. Congress offered it to the states as an option several years ago, a way to serve the near-poor, many of whom work and lack health insurance. But New York's effort to enact it was stymied by a fight over whether to include funding for abortion.
The deadlock was broken this year when those who advocated doing so adopted the Governor's proposal to forgo abortion funding for those with incomes in the 100 to 185 percent of poverty range. Current law provides such funding for those whose income is lower, and the Governor vowed again last week to fight to retain it.
The new measure will add about 70,000 women and their children to the Medicaid rolls at a cost of about $160 million to the Federal and state governments. But that's likely to be more of an investment than a cost. It will promptly mean fewer premature and underweight babies who require spectacularly expensive neonatal care. The health and dollar dividends will continue throughout these children's lives.
In addition to these major items, Mr. Cuomo won added funding for pre-kindergarten for disadvantaged children, a step toward making it universally available.
These measures are worthy successors to Liberty Scholarships and other Decade of the Child legislation adopted last year. They give welcome evidence that, even in tough budgetary times, Mr. Cuomo and the State of New York remain committed to improving the lives of poor children.
The Congressional version of E.T. isn't lovable or extraterrestrial. But it will likely become an even bigger financial success than the joyous movie character. Medicare payments to doctors have risen more than 15 percent a year in the 1980's. Because three-quarters of these reimbursements are paid by taxes, Congress wants to impose a program of expenditure targets, or E.T. While not without risk, the plan deserves support.
E.T., approved by the House Ways and Means Committee last month, is part of a comprehensive overhaul of Medicare payments to physicians. Under it, the Department of Health and Human Services would effect a new schedule of fees that Government will pay Medicare doctors. The legislation would also limit how much doctors could charge beyond the approved fees.
In the past, controlling fees has failed to control Medicare outlays because physicians have found ways to bill for additional services. E.T. would answer this problem by offsetting excessive billing in one year with lower fees the next.
Each year, Human Services would set a national target for overall outlays based on factors like the number of retirees and inflation. If actual outlays nationwide exceed the target by, say, 2 percent, then the department would lower fees it will pay for procedures by 2 percent the following year.
Reductions would not have to apply equally across the board. Human Services would have plenty of discretion to single out particular specialties, procedures or regions that appeared to be contributing more than others to the overruns.
As expected, the American Medical Association has denounced E.T. Controlling fees, the A.M.A. warns, could make Medicare treatment unprofitable, causing doctors to turn away Medicare patients. But those predictions are alarmist. The legislation strictly limits the amount by which Human Services could lower fees in any one year no matter how large the previous cost overrun.
In the unlikely event that Human Services set fees below costs so that physicians began withdrawing their services, the error would become obvious, and it would face enormous pressure to raise fees.
Instead of E.T., the A.M.A. prefers treatment guidelines to control unnecessary billings. Such guidelines could be used by peer review panels to keep an eye on individual physicians. That's not a bad idea, though health experts like Alain Enthoven, professor of management at Stanford, are skeptical that such guidelines can adequately control costs. (An article by Mr. Enthoven on today's Op-Ed page begins a series concerning health care.) Yet E.T. and treatment guidelines are not contradictory. In fact, E.T. should encourage the A.M.A. to design such guidelines as a way to live with E.T. Only by disciplining themselves and weeding out unnecessary billing will physicians insulate their fees from the Human Services hatchet.
E.T. is not riskless. Doctors may fail at self-discipline; or Human Services may, despite pressure to the contrary, persist in setting fees too low. But those risks are worth taking. Previous attempts to control physician costs have failed. E.T. offers a reasonable way to do much better.
The House Ways and Means Committee has demonstrated once again there are ways and means to raise revenue without raising taxes. Seeking $5.3 billion of new revenue, but circumscribed by President Bush's promise of ''no new taxes,'' the committee has focused on old taxes. It has closed loopholes, extended expiring taxes and tinkered a lot. The resulting bill improves the tax law.
The two toughest issues remain unsettled -catastrophic health care insurance fees and the tax on capital gains. Older voters are pressing hard to cut the new health care fees; if that's done without making cuts in benefits, the lost revenue would have to be made up elsewhere. Cutting the tax on capital gains, which are now taxed as ordinary income, would yield more revenue immediately but less in the long run.
Members may be tempted to combine these two issues. But two wrongs don't make a right; catastrophic health care needs fine-tuning, not hasty retreat; and a reduced tax on capital gains would still be an unwarranted favor to the rich.
By design, the committee bill mainly affects corporations. Two items would yield half of the $5.3 billion required for the fiscal 1990 budget. One would put off a scheduled $1 billion reduction in airport and airway user taxes. The other would repeal tax incentives for employee stock ownership plans; this could yield close to $1.5 billion. Corporations have started abusing the process, setting up plans that protect themselves against takeovers without giving employees much in the way of ownership rights. The abusers deserve no tax breaks, but it would be fairer if the breaks could be retained for legitimate plans.
The typical taxpayer would not feel much impact from the committee bill, except on the deductibility of interest on consumer loans. The 1986 tax reform eliminated this deduction, on the legitimate grounds that the Government should encourage saving, not spending. But it did so gradually. Under the committee bill, partial deductions would end this year.
President Bush made a deal with Congress that the 1990 budget would include $5.3 billion of new revenue, but turned the task into a riddle by ruling out new taxes. The Ways and Means Committee has made a good start on the answer.
Is New York City a healthy place for children? Not very, says the draft report of the Mayor's Commission on the Future of Child Health - especially not if the children are poor. The report became a political issue when Richard Ravitch, a Democratic candidate for mayor, publicized it and accused Mayor Koch of trying to suppress it. Mr. Koch, at first defensive, now promises an urgent response.
The commission calls attention to how the health care needs of children, from birth to age 19, have changed dramatically in the last decade. Lack of immunization leaves too many children vulnerable to traditional infectious diseases like measles. But even more threatening are AIDS, accidents, child abuse and sexually transmitted diseases. In 1987 New York City's infant mortality rate rose, for the first time in 13 years; for children aged 1 to 4, the leading cause of death was AIDS.
These ''diseases of life style'' are rooted in poverty and reflect a ''new morbidity,'' the commission said. The Division of Substance Abuse has found that one child in 10 in New York State has a parent who uses drugs. Health problems are most acute among children living in families that are poor or near-poor. Nearly 25 percent of all New York City children are uninsured.
Dramatic changes are needed in the way health services are delivered to children. The commission's recommendations include: more and improved health centers, expanded access to high-quality prenatal care for women and increased community programs in mental health, day care, family planning and drug treatment.
To what extent does Mr. Koch bear the blame? The emergence of AIDS, crack and the diseases of life style reflect trends beyond the power of any mayor. At the same time, no commission is needed to see that the city's services for poor children are poorly funded and managed.
Release of the report has forced a response; the Mayor has instructed top officials to evaluate all the recommendations within a week. He indicates that he wants all uninsured children from birth to age 6 to receive free preventive health care. The health of children ought not to be politicized, but in this case, politics may be doing some good.
Three medigap policies. One major medical policy. Plus Medicare. Fear and ignorance had driven the 75-year-old Philadelphia woman to cope with her husband's skyrocketing medical bills by desperately buying one medical insurance policy after another. Though she could barely afford necessities, she wound up spending thousands on policies she did not need.
Medical insurance is dizzyingly complex, and even well-intentioned medical insurers, agents and consumers make mistakes. But there are plenty of knaves and fools who prey on intimidated retirees, persuading them to carry unnecessary insurance.
Medigap insurance, which pays some of the medical expenses Medicare won't cover, is especially troublesome. Consumers Union estimates that as many as one-third of all Medicare enrollees buy multiple, redundant policies from private insurers. Even those with only one policy typically buy unnecessary coverage.
Comparing policies can be baffling. Does the policy cover physician excess charges (fees that exceed Medicare's allowable charge)? If so, how extensively? What about the various Medicare deductibles and hospital coinsurance? Are psychiatric bills reimbursed? The typical medigap policy is a blizzard of exclusions, limitations and conditions.
The Philadelphia woman was lucky enough to get help from a nonprofit financial counselor who advised her to shed all of her insurance except Medicare and one medigap policy. But most poor families have no access to financial counseling.
The Federal Government could address the confusion and waste by offering optional, unsubsidized medigap coverage along with Medicare. That would cost taxpayers nothing. And with the administrative machinery for Medicare already in place, the Federal Government might provide medigap insurance less expensively than private insurers. But creating such a benefit would mean overcoming the political opposition of the private insurers.
Alternatively, Washington could set standards for private medigap policies. Standards, however, won't keep retirees from choosing coverage they do not personally need or buying policies from more than one carrier.
Representative John Dingell has proposed that Washington design three medigap policies (low, medium and high cost) and require that private insurers sell nothing else. That would solve the problems of complexity and comparability. But it would also stifle innovation.
While political leaders search for answers, there is one modest step that would save precious dollars for people like the fearful woman in Philadelphia. Most families that purchase multiple policies buy them from both the American Association of Retired Persons and Blue Cross/ Blue Shield. Each of these exemplary organizations surely knows that many of its enrollees own duplicate policies with the other. Yet they issue no clear warnings. The Blues, similarly, could prevent retirees from buy-ing their major medical insurance since it duplicates Medicare.
It may take Congress some time to come up with a workable reform. In the meantime, the big insurers could alleviate abuse by telling potential enrollees when not to buy their policies.
THE EDITORIAL NOTEBOOK
In a few months a new task force headed by Dr. James O. Mason, the Assistant Secretary for Public Health, is slated to tell President Bush what America should do about ''crack babies'' - the thousands born brain-damaged, malformed or seizure-prone because their mothers smoked crack during pregnancy. The answers aren't obvious.
If the nation as a whole boasts too few drug treatment programs, there are even fewer for pregnant addicts and addicted mothers. Furthermore there's no consensus about what constitutes a model program. About all the crack experts agree upon is that bringing criminal charges against addicted women, as several states have done, is a sure way to keep others from asking for help.
It is clear that such women need counseling in addition to medical monitoring. But while some physicians claim that residential treatment is vital, several outpatient programs have been successful. At Chicago's Northwestern Memorial Hospital, for example, 79 percent of the women who undergo outpatient treatment are still off drugs a year after giving birth. While heroin addicts can turn to methadone, there is no such chemical blocker for cocaine. New York's Lincoln Hospital, however, is excited about its acupuncture project. Its participants, who also receive pregnancy education and prenatal care, aren't screened and aren't necessarily highly motivated. Even so, of those who average 20 visits, more than half stay drug-free while in treatment.
Another New York program called P.A.A.M. (Pregnant Addicts and Addicted Mothers) has started sending four-person teams - medical personnel, a social worker and a specially trained member of the community - into the addict's home for parent-training sessions. The logic of such an approach is laudable, but it's too soon yet to measure results.
Whatever the task force discovers, it is likely that the cost of helping crack babies will be high -but not as high as the cost of more children in foster homes, more babies tethered to tubes in intensive-care units, more lifetime care for the irrevocably damaged. America pays a terrible price for cocaine addiction; children may pay the highest price of all.
Meeting the health costs of AIDS will not be easy. But health insurance companies are making a cruel situation worse by insisting on the right to test applicants for health insurance and, in some cases, by restricting coverage for the disease. The cost of AIDS is large and growing, but is still a very small part of the national health bill.
Health insurers say the principle of their business is that premiums ought to be based on degree of risk. To grant new policies to people infected with the AIDS virus is unfair to those not infected, the insurers contend. They point out, furthermore, that they are allowed to discriminate against those who expose themselves to known risks of smoking.
But they are not allowed to discriminate against those with other kinds of risks, like inheritable diseases. In fact, the risks that insurers may or may not consider are a matter of public policy, generally decided by state insurance commissions.
In both California and New York, the two states most affected by the AIDS epidemic, state insurance commissioners have ruled that health insurance companies may not test applicants for the AIDS virus. New York is appealing a state judge's decision that the commissioner acted beyond his powers and legislated rather than regulated.
The state commissions believe that AIDS, despite its cost, is not yet affecting companies' solvency. Most people are insured through group health insurance plans, in which each year's premium can be adjusted to reflect the prior year's health costs. The insurance companies' concern is with the much smaller number of people who apply for individual health insurance; this pool of people is too small, they say, to spread the costs of many new AIDS patients.
That may one day be true. But it isn't now. ''There is no question the system is being strained. But it's a little hysterical to say that AIDS is driving the problem,'' says Kevin Foley, deputy superintendent of the New York State Insurance Commission. Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New York paid out $100 million for AIDS last year. That's a large and growing amount, but is still only 2.2 percent of all claims. The company does not test individual applicants for the AIDS virus and sees no reason to do so. It has applied for rate increases, citing AIDS as one factor, but the growing burden of AIDS is still small in comparison with the general rise in medical costs.
Life insurance companies cannot adjust quickly to changing risks, and need to protect against people who take out policies after testing positive for the virus. Health insurers do not have this justification. If the industry denies coverage to the million or so Americans who may be infected, its other policyholders may save a few dollars on their premiums. But they will pay all the same as taxpayers when AIDS patients who cannot afford their own care spend themselves into poverty and then become eligible for Medicaid, the Federal health insurance for the poor. There is no justification for such an inhumane policy, especially as long as the costs of AIDS remain relatively small.
Over 150,000 telephone workers in 15 states and the District of Columbia are striking the so-called Baby Bells - Nynex, Pacific Telesis and Bell Atlantic. The major dispute is over health coverage.
Premiums for medical insurance are rising by more than 15 percent each year and the companies are demanding that the workers absorb some of the expense.
Ordinarily, labor-management disputes over compensation are private affairs. But at the root of this conflict is Federal tax policy that subsidizes lavish fringe benefits. The result is escalating medical costs and a drain on the Treasury. The strike amplifies the need for a sharp limit on the health benefit tax deduction.
The telephone workers, like most Americans, are covered by health insurance paid by their employers. The workers pay no tax on the medical premiums. By negotiating higher medical benefits rather than higher wages, workers in effect lower their taxes.
Under most health plans, workers are free to choose their own doctors and be reimbursed for most if not all of the expense. With little control over the choice of doctors, employers exert little control over fees. And workers have little incentive to limit their doctor visits. For both these reasons, health costs have been increasing.
Nationally, corporations have begun to feel the pinch of that inflation. They would reduce it by requiring workers to pay higher deductibles, co-insurance and premiums. The higher payments would shift some of the escalating costs to workers. They would also lower health costs over all by giving workers an incentive to avoid high-priced doctors and unnecessary medical procedures.
Employees are understandably upset at the idea. The telephone workers have said loud and clear that they will no more tolerate a cut in medical benefits than they would an outright cut in wages.
But a cut in future wages is inevitable if employers settle for increasingly expensive medical benefits. More money for health leaves less for wages (and profits). Even the telephone industry, which is regulated, cannot readily pass on increased costs to consumers. Thus its workers and employers share an interest in controlling health costs.
Beyond requiring more deductibles, some companies are contemplating ''managed care'' plans. Under this system, workers can choose from among a panel of pre-selected doctors and be reimbursed for all expenses. But if the worker chooses his own doctor, he pays a sizable deductible and co-insurance fee. Managed care systems control costs better than free-choice plans because the company -or its insurer - can negotiate fees and treatment practices with the participating panel of doctors.
Managed care systems are a promising solution to the problem of runaway health costs. Yet, as the health expert Mark Pauly of the University of Pennsylvania observes, it is unlikely that workers will accept such plans. As the telephone strike demonstrates, workers are in no mood to go along with efforts by employers to cap medical benefits, limit choice or impose deductibles. Even if employers raise wages to compensate for these restrictions, workers would lose because the wage increases would be taxed.
The Federal Government, however, could alter the terms of this dispute by imposing some limits on the tax subsidy for health insurance. For example, it could tax health benefits that exceed a certain basic level or require that employers institute other effective cost controls. That would not threaten basic coverage, but it would give the worker a new incentive to worry about excessive costs. As long as Congress fails to legislate limits, the nation is likely to see more strikes over health coverage.
Mary Sue Davis wants to have a baby. But since 1979, when she married Junior Lewis Davis, she has suffered several ectopic pregnancies, a ruptured fallopian tube and the tying off of the second. She and Mr. Davis have participated in an in vitro fertilization program too, but the implantation of two out of nine fertilized eggs was unsuccessful. Now the marriage has turned unsuccessful as well: her husband has filed for divorce.
Mrs. Davis wants the remaining seven fertilized eggs, so she can try again to get pregnant. Mr. Davis says she can't have them, because he has a right to control his own reproduction. And Judge W. Dale Young has to make a difficult decision. Are these embryos potential children, in which case the court must look to their better interests? Or are they property, in which case ownership might be settled as in a regular property dispute?
Jay Christenberry, the lawyer for Mrs. Davis, has found witnesses who argue that such embryos are ''preborn children.'' According to broad scientific consensus, however, they are at this point of development seven clusters of four to eight undifferentiated cells - in short, blastocysts.
Mrs. Davis has said she neither wishes to force anything on her husband nor take anything - child support included - from him. Like countless other women who have undergone artificial insemination, in vitro or otherwise, she simply wants to have a baby. In Mr. Davis she had a sperm donor, and in her willingness to spare him any parental or financial responsibilities she is treating him as such.
Mr. Davis says he is being ''raped of my reproductive rights,'' and that the fate of the eggs ''is a joint decision.'' And it is understandable that he might have strong feelings of fatherhood even in the absence of financial and legal obligations. However, there would be no ''joint decision'' involved if Mrs. Davis were pregnant and wanted to abort: the decision would be hers alone.
A law professor from the University of Texas suggests that Mrs. Davis find herself another donor. But in view of her medical history, and the emotional, economic and physiological pain she has already encountered during the in vitro procedure, his good idea seems careless, even callous.
Ideally, Mr. and Mrs. Davis would have made a decision about what should be done with the fertilized eggs if the marriage failed before embarking on the in vitro process. But even if they had, one or the other might have had a change of heart - and still ended up in court.
''Medical technology is running ahead of morality,'' a British doctor said when the first ''test-tube baby,'' Louise Brown, was born 11 years ago. It's also running far ahead of the law.
The phone strike is about the high cost of medical care. The company wants workers to pay more of the bill. It believes this will make them think twice before buying the first thing some hospital or doctor tries to sell them.
Customers at present lack incentive to shop around if they are covered by an insurance scheme financed mostly by a corporation or government. Here is what happens: ''It could be Monaghan's sesquiseptilia,'' says the doctor. ''Or it could be just that old spore overload acting on the tutelary gland again.''
''You recommend a spore count, Doctor?''
''I'm afraid we can't eliminate the possibility of Monaghan's sesquiseptilia without a LEM scan.''
A LEM scan! That's even scarier than Monaghan's sesquiseptilia. The patient knows what a LEM scan is: a laserized epidermically metered X-ray. He heard about it from a friend who had had his terminal crudelia doloroso detected by a LEM scan, which was the newest thing in scans that year.
''Suppose the LEM scan is positive, Doctor?''
''In cases of Monaghan's sesquiseptilia we advise a serial organ transplant as soon as you can be extracted from the scanner. Would you want a private room at the hospital or a roll-away cot situated discreetly outside the morgue?''
''Whatever you think is best, Doctor, is O.K. with me, I guess.''
Since the patient has already had to give a receptionist the number of his health-insurance policy, there isn't likely to be much talk about how much all this will cost.
How many customers ask the price of a LEM scan and the comparative rates on the private room versus the cot? How many say, ''I'll get back to you, Doc, after I've shopped around to see what else is on the market''?
Too few, says the phone company, probably correctly. People aren't likely to bargain ferociously about medical costs when they're paying only a trifling share of the bill. Result: very little competition at the consumer level in the medical business. Further result: The price of health care goes up at the rate of 20 percent a year.
If the car business worked this way American highways would be jammed bumper-to-bumper with Rolls-Royces. When you don't have to worry about paying the bill, price is no restraint on treating yourself to the best.
The phone company's social engineers are dreaming, however, if they think Americans can be trained to shop around for medical care as exuberantly as they shop for good deals in automobiles.
Americans, for one thing, don't take automobiles as seriously as their health. A generation of intense advertising has created a national health neurosis. Americans can make fun of cars, but let one of them light a cigarette in a crowded room and sweet good humor gives way to sour rage and hatred.
Such a race of people is not likely to go comparison shopping through fluttering plastic whirligigs of the city's most repellent suburbs in search of the best deal in town on kidney transplants, hospital lodging bargains and colonoscopies.
These people are hellbent on living at least long enough to see Willard Scott display their centennial snapshots on the ''Today'' show between a warm mass of tropical air and an abnormally convoluted jet stream up over Canada.
Are they going to be willing to save a few bucks on the annual physical checkup by retaining ''Honest Doc'' Sawbones (''We'll beat any deal in town'') instead of the full staff of Society of Suitable Surgeons Hospital?
To state the problem in these crass terms is to illustrate why it is so hard to make Americans shop the medical market. The car salesman, poor devil, is socially suspect. Probably a sharpster who will end up conning us, or such at least is the popular idea of him, though he may often have a noble soul and be a lover of humanity and a tireless church worker.
A doctor may just as easily be a fraud, a perjurer, a lecher, a swindler, a wife-beater; yet when we think ''doctor'' we think respectfully, even reverentially. To bargain about foul money with such a pillar of civilization is painful, not at all like the good sport of bargaining with car salesmen.
The doctor might be offended if money were mentioned!
And wouldn't he have a right to be? Indeed, would we not lose confidence in him if he failed to be offended? This, after all, is a person we rely upon to bless us with life eternal. He is surely too good to care about money.
Prognosis for medical costs: There are worse ways to die than penniless.
OBSERVER
The drug AZT, already used to treat people with overt symptoms of AIDS, has now also proved effective in delaying the onset of those symptoms. To exploit this clear advance requires a major shift in public policy toward AIDS: more testing, and more financial help for the many who now stand to benefit from the expensive treatment.
When tests for the AIDS virus first became available, there were proposals to apply them widely. But at that time, there was no good reason for testing. Doctors could offer no treatment to those who tested positive, and all they could give those who didn't was advice on safe sex. Gay men, the principal group then at high risk, already knew the advice. Testing did not seem so urgent.
The new treatments that now have become available change that calculus. Doctors can monitor the immune systems of those found to be infected, and at the first sign of impairment can treat them - with AZT to attack the virus and with pentamidine to avert pneumonia. The Gay Mens Health Crisis in New York now favors testing, and last week it launched a campaign to encourage more people to get themselves tested.
Meanwhile, the disease has spread among intravenous drug abusers and crack addicts in poor inner-city communities, who are far harder to reach than gay men. There is reason to believe that many women and their infants in New York are infected with the virus without the mothers' being aware of it. The AIDS virus test needs to be offered more vigorously to clients by family planners, sexual disease clinics and physicians. An aggressive, voluntary system of contact tracing among drug addicts is also worth trying.
Of the million or so Americans who may now be infected with the AIDS virus, some 650,000 have probably entered the stage of immune impairment at which AZT can help delay symptoms. But many lack health insurance and would be unable to afford the tests of immune function and the exorbitant cost of AZT.
Government has a duty to find and advise those infected with the AIDS virus. It will play an extremely cruel trick on them if it does not also find ways to provide the treatment they need but which many cannot afford. Medicaid will cover the cost of the drug for those who cannot pay for it, but only after they have spent themselves into poverty.
The Burroughs Wellcome Company, the maker of AZT, sets a price that costs users up to $8,000 for a year's treatment. Government scientists both discovered the drug and developed the test that proved its effectiveness against AIDS; the company merely beat the Government to the patent office door. The price is said to be the highest ever charged for a drug, yet its maker took a far smaller risk than the full-scale invention that the patent system is designed to reward.
The new-found efficacy of AZT and pentamidine marks heartening progress in the effort to develop drugs against the new plague of AIDS. What a tragedy if society should fail to deliver the fruits of this research to all those who need them to live.
AZT is the only drug approved for use against AIDS. It's now known that AZT also postpones the onset of AIDS in people infected with the virus. Yet there's a massive obstacle to wider use of this life-saving drug - its extraordinary cost. At $8,000 a year for users, AZT is said to be the most expensive prescription drug in history.
Some 35 percent of AIDS patients have either no health insurance or policies that do not pay for drugs. Many might be unable to afford AZT without the help of a temporary Government program that ends in September. All Americans bear the high cost of the drug, in taxes or insurance premiums.
There's another reason to want AZT to cost less. If AZT reduces an individual's infectiousness, as is possible though not yet proved, wide use of the drug might help sharply curb the epidemic. The present high price can only impede such efforts.
Drug companies deserve high profits on new drugs to encourage invention and risk-taking. What makes the cost of AZT hard to swallow is that all the invention and much of the risk was undertaken by the Federal Government.
The average cost of bringing a new drug to market is $125 million. The maker of AZT, the Burroughs Wellcome Company of North Carolina, refuses to state its costs, but it's hard to believe they reached a fraction of this sum. AZT was first synthesized in 1964, as a possible anti-cancer agent, by Jerome Horwitz of the Michigan Cancer Foundation. In 1984, Samuel Broder of the National Cancer Institute encouraged companies to submit possible anti-AIDS drugs for screening by a special test developed in his laboratory. Burroughs Wellcome sent in AZT, a compound it happened to have on its shelves after studying it for another purpose.
Since few other pharmaceutical companies were much interested in AIDS drugs at that time, Burroughs deserves credit for pressing ahead. But to encourage it to take even this chance, the Government allowed it to apply for full patent rights, despite the heavy Federal contribution. The Government then conducted or supported many of the clinical tests of AZT, and for early production it provided all the thymidine, a critical ingredient.
Burroughs at first justified its astoundingly high price for AZT by noting rival drugs would soon be on the market. But the rival drugs still haven't appeared. Burroughs did reduce the retail price from $10,000 to $8,000 in 1987. The company now says the present 40,000 AIDS patients are the only customers it can be sure of. Every epidemiologist expects the toll to rise far higher.
As other promising AIDS drugs reach the market, competition will force the price of AZT down. But that may be many months ahead, and meanwhile Burroughs's apparent profit bears little evident relation to its risks.
Burroughs Wellcome is the subsidiary of a British company that is 75 percent owned by a charitable foundation, the Wellcome Trust. Wellcome's trustees are academics, many of them retired, who distribute the revenues for medical research. This is no doubt a worthy cause. But it's a strange kind of charity that cordons off people already suffering from a terrifying disease.
Tonight, President George Bush will unveil his new drug strategy. Draft versions have already circulated widely, and the drug czar, William Bennett, has been actively promoting the plan. Written with an easy candor unusual in Government documents, the report promises to spark a long-needed national debate on the goals of our drug policy.
The report vividly depicts the devastating impact of drug abuse, recognizing that inner-city crack cocaine is our biggest and most immediate problem. It acknowledges that a variety of approaches are needed and that overreliance on any single element will fail - witness the enormous concentration on drug law enforcement of the past eight years. It also makes a convincing case for a halt to the rapid expansion of border interdiction, which this year received more support than prevention, education and treatment combined.
Yet the report is curiously two-headed. An insightful and compelling analysis of the drug problem is accompanied by proposals that continue many of the failed policies of the past eight years. Consider the following.
Mr. Bush's new strategy would continue to concentrate primarily on law enforcement, despite overwhelming evidence accumulated during the past eight years of the minimal impact of law enforcement on drug abuse and drug trafficking. Enforcement will receive about 70 percent of the total Federal drug budget, compared with 30 percent for prevention, education and treatment. This represents an increase of less than 5 percent in spending to reduce the demand for drugs.
The report recommends doing more of everything, with the notable exception of interdiction, and avoids the tough choices among programs that budgetary constraints inevitably will impose. Although systematic evaluation of programs to reduce supply and demand is still limited, we know that some approaches have relatively little effect and should be modified or abandoned, no matter how appealing they are in principle, For example, the strategy provides greater increases in efforts to reduce cocaine production in the source countries than for treatment of drug abusers in the U.S. But there is strong evidence that reducing coca production will have little effect on cocaine prices in this country. Even if coca cultivation and cocaine refining were reduced by half, the street price of cocaine in the U.S. would increase by less than 5 percent.
It may be good foreign policy for the U.S. to provide, say, $65 million to the democratically elected Government of Colombia to strengthen its war against the Medellin cartel, but we should have no illusions that this aid will do much to cut cocaine availability here. Treatment, on the other hand, although not a panacea, does reduce drug abuse and criminality by some addicts, as is acknowledged in the Bennett report.
The report also attacks all drugs and drug use equally, continuing the ''zero tolerance'' approach of the past eight years. Although recognizing the greater destructiveness of crack cocaine, for example, it proposes increased resources for eradication of illegal domestic marijuana cultivation, even though marijuana use has dropped significantly.
Moreover, the new strategy would strengthen criminal penalties against drug users at a time when the criminal justice system cannot even impose swift and sure punishment on drug traffickers. Given the likelihood of strict funding limits, targeting resources becomes imperative.
Another curious aspect of the Bennett report is the modesty of its goals. So modest are its aspirations, in fact, that if Mr. Bennett were just to continue with the existing Federal antidrug effort, he would in all likelihood exceed his goals for reducing consumption of illicit drugs.
Mr. Bennett, for example, wants to achieve an annual drop of 5 percent in the nation's illicit drug use, when that use has declined about 12 percent a year since 1985. He wants to reduce annual cocaine use by 5 percent, although it has dropped at an annual rate of more than 10 percent a year over the past three years.
The strategy's impact should be measured not by use, which is falling anyway, but by quantifiable reductions in the destructive effects of drug abuse and drug dealing: the numbers of drug-addicted babies, the rate of transmission of the AIDS virus by intravenous drug users, the numbers of drug-related crimes and children arrested for dealing. These are graphic, painful reminders of our continuing failure to respond effectively to the nation's drug crisis.
Last year, New York State's Office of Court Administration issued guidelines for the handling of defendants and prisoners with AIDS. It was a sorry display of ignorance. Among other things, the guidelines authorized use of surgical gloves, masks and plastic shields when dealing with AIDS victims.
Now a report from the New York City Bar Association makes clear the need for enlightened new rules. It documents that AIDS has become the leading cause of inmate deaths in New York State and City corrections facilities. From 1981 to 1988, 763 inmates in state, county and city facilities reportedly died of the disease; the number for 1988 alone was 199. An estimated 17 percent of the state's 44,000 prisoners may be infected.
New York State ought to be leading in the humane treatment of inmates with AIDS. But the criminal justice system has muddled through with a patchwork of policies and practices typified by the uninformed rules established by the Office of Court Administration. Despite clear evidence that AIDS is not spread by casual contact, the rules allow court officers to guard an afflicted person from a distance of 10 feet, and they sanction the use of protective devices.
The Bar Association recommends far less dramatic precautions - and suggests they be routine for handling all prisoners. It also recommends that access to information about AIDS victims be restricted to those directly involved in their medical care. As it is, casual discussion of a patient's illness may lead to discriminatory treatment.
Most important, the report stresses the importance of mandatory, continuing education about AIDS for all criminal justice officials.
Some points in the report bear examination. It suggests, for example, that inmates with AIDS be handled in the mainstream of other prisoners, and that prison infirmaries be expanded to handle the caseload. Many afflicted inmates might be better served in a prison specially set up for them. But over all, the Bar Association, unlike the Office of Court Administration, shows a willingness to confront reality with intelligence and compassion.
''Those who judge our strategy only by its price tag simply don't understand the problem,'' President Bush said in his first big televised speech, committing his Administration to an expanded war on drugs. But in fact, the price tag is all-important. Laudably, Mr. Bush offers an intelligent strategy in place of the simplistic oratory of his predecessor. Lamentably, having pointed in the right direction, Mr. Bush offers a program that would bring progress measured in inches.
If he means what he said Tuesday night, that drugs are ''the gravest domestic threat facing our nation today,'' then he needs to respond with equal gravity - and spending. His words say nothing is more important. His actions say that in fact, he considers something else more important: his stubborn promise not to raise taxes.
Dramatically, the President displayed a plastic envelope of crack. ''It's as innocent looking as candy, but it is turning our cities into battle zones, and it is murdering our children.'' No resident of New York, Los Angeles or Washington D.C. would call that exaggerated.
Mr. Bush then outlined a program prepared by William Bennett, his director of drug policy. Federal money would help local law enforcement reclaim neighborhoods now overrun by drug gangs and expand the criminal justice system. Drug treatment capacity would be enlarged; so would drug education and prevention.
Mr. Bush also calls for spending $261 million, on top of $65 million already committed, to help Colombia, Peru and Bolivia get rid of drug crops, drug processing labs and drug traffickers. The aid would bolster Colombia's President, Virgilio Barco, in his fight against the bloodthirsty drug cartels. All told, Mr. Bush would spend $2 billion over three years to help the three countries.
Some critics glibly characterize the plan as merely a rejiggering of old ideas. But what new ideas are evident? Mr. Bennett conducted a creditable inquiry into what has been learned so far. He and Mr. Bush continue to emphasize law enforcement, but they would shift the focus from the border interdiction that has not been effective to street-level harassment of drug dealers. Police have had some success with aggressive new tactics keeping dealers on the run and reclaiming neighborhoods torn by drug violence.
The money for Andean countries, furthermore, represents a dramatic new gesture. The three countries now receive less than $100 million in U.S. help. Their police and military agencies must scrounge for crumbs - a helicopter here, a few new trucks there. Especially with the wave of outrage in Colombia, the infusion of funds and equipment could make a huge difference.
But these initiatives, while sensible, are small. Taken as a whole, the Bush-Bennett strategy calls for adding $2.2 billion to the $5.7 billion spent in the current fiscal year. And much of that $2.2 billion would go for Federal prisons needed with or without a drug strategy. Only $716 million of the new money, bled from other programs, would actually be spent next year.
If Mr. Bush is serious that drugs must be fought ''neighborhood by neighborhood, block by block, child by child,'' then surely he does not also mean nickel by nickel, dime by dime.
The Bush plan preserves the current antidrug spending breakdown of 70 percent for law enforcement and 30 percent for education and treatment. Yet there is broad agreement that as much ought to go for treatment as for law enforcement. Limited funds appear to force the imbalance.
The President, extravagant with words, is stingy with dollars because he is broke - by his own choice. No matter how savagely drugs damage America, he continues to hold sacred his campaign pledge against any new taxes. Compare his anti-tax stubbornness with the anti-drug courage of Colombia's leaders.
Mr. Bush yesterday dismissed such reactions as mere partisan ''carping.'' But the fact remains: Until he puts fighting illegal drugs ahead of reading his lips, his call to arms sounds more like a whisper.
Does reducing cholesterol, by diet or with special drugs, lessen the risk of heart disease? Yes, says a broad consensus of experts represented by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and the American Heart Association. No, contends a vigorously iconoclastic article by Thomas J. Moore in the current Atlantic Monthly. It's probably safer to bet with the experts; still, the benefit of their confident prescriptions could well be less than the public expects.
Cholesterol is an essential substance produced by the body. But high levels of cholesterol in the blood are clearly associated with heart disease, so experts have long urged people to cut down on foods rich in fat and cholesterol. At the same time they have mounted costly trials to prove the value of such advice.
The paradox is that it has been surprisingly hard to prove the value of such treatments. In some trials, subjects cut their cholesterol levels too little to have any demonstrable effect on heart disease. In others, special drugs were used to lower cholesterol in people with seriously high levels. The patients suffered less heart disease than an untreated group but, oddly enough, didn't live any longer.
Though they suffered less heart disease, they died in greater numbers from other causes, including - bizarrely - death from violence and accidents. Accidents may seem an unlikely side-effect. Still, powerful drugs often have subtle side-effects that can outweigh immediate benefits, and these trials do not dispose of the issue.
The difficulty of getting clear proof of benefit in treatment trials may reflect unknown factors in the link between blood fats and heart disease. Mr. Moore contends that the benefits of cholesterol reduction programs for the general population have been vastly overstated, and he cites a recent Harvard study conclusion that a lifelong program of cholesterol reduction would yield ''a gain in life expectancy of three days to three months.'' Given the high cost of cholesterol-lowering drugs, he questions whether the campaign against cholesterol will be worth the expense.
His skepticism is partly shared in the current New England Journal of Medicine. Dr. Allan Brett, of the New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston, notes the uncertainty of extending to the whole population the remedies that have been tested only on people with very high cholesterol levels. Diet can be recommended without fear, Dr. Brett argues, since it is ''at worst harmless.'' But before prescribing powerful drugs for a patient with no symptoms of heart disease, a physician should warn of the ''somewhat speculative'' benefits.
Cholesterol experts feel their critics are carping at details in inevitably complex experiments and ignoring the larger picture. Coronary heart disease is the country's leading cause of death, killing more than 500,000 people a year, and many millions have seriously high cholesterol levels. It's surely better to offer the best possible medical advice now, given the undisputed link between high cholesterol and heart disease, than to say nothing until every detail of the problem is understood.
These are compelling arguments, and the Heart Institute is careful to recommend cholesterol-reducing drugs only when diet has failed. Still, skeptics play a valuable role in goading proponents for better proof.
The experts' tendency to cite all the other experts who believe the same thing is far from reassuring: experts can err, even in chorus. The National Heart Institute should be prompting both sides of the debate to resolve their differences by experiment. That way it might obtain evidence for its prescriptions as substantial as the change it is seeking to make in the American diet.
June and Frank, a poor elderly couple I know in West Philadelphia, don't follow Congressional debates. But this week, their lives may be drastically affected. The House will decide the fate of the catastrophic-health insurance program. Plagued by cost overruns and a revolt of upper-income families who pay a disproportionate share of the expense, the program may be repealed. Even if it's not, Congress will trim coverage and raise premiums.
Congressional debate about catastrophic insurance centers on abstractions like fairness, efficiency, cost. But June's and Frank's pain is real. They used to squeak by on their Social Security and pensions. Then Frank's diabetic condition worsened and life turned unbearable.
Progressively, Frank became blind, forgetful and incontinent. He needed constant emotional and physical attention. Too poor to hire help, June was trapped in her house by day and unable to sleep by night.
Then came last year's Federal catastrophic-health insurance program - and the exhilarating prospect that Frank could get 150 days of covered treatment in a skilled nursing facility. June approached a nearby nursing home. Yes, insulin-dependent diabetes was covered under the catastrophic-health insurance program. But no, the home had no empty beds. June approached a second nursing home, only a mile away. Yes, they had empty beds. But no, they did not cover insulin-dependent diabetes under catastrophic-health insurance.
June was confused, and angry. It turns out that each skilled nursing facility has its own ''intermediary'' that processes reimbursement claims for Medicare. The intermediary decides which medical conditions are covered according to its interpretation of Medicare rules. The two nursing homes June approached used different rules because they used different inter-mediaries. There was nothing June could do.
The story appeared to have a nice ending. A bed opened up at the first facility. For the past three months, Frank has received superb care. And June has been getting precious nights of sleep. She can shop, visit friends and family and even treat herself to a movie without fearing for Frank's safety. Three delicious months gone. Two to go.
What June does not know is that Congress is on the verge of repealing the entire program. Not 150 days of treatment for Frank; not even one. And all in order to spare middle and upper income families from paying a surtax that is capped at $800 - a limit that fewer than 6 percent of beneficiaries reach. To ward off repeal, the House Ways and Means Committee has proposed a compromise that would cut back, but not eliminate, the catastrophic-health program. In exchange, the surtax on upper-income families would be halved.
The best outcome would be to leave the existing benefits alone. Even with the current surtax, Medicare heavily subsidizes the wealthiest families. Typical elderly people with income of $40,000 will pay for only two-thirds of the Medicare benefits they receive during their lifetimes. The current surtax reduces this subsidy for non-poor families so that the poor may receive catastrophic-health coverage.
But as an alternative to repeal, the committee's compromise deserves support. It would preserve most of the benefits for the poor, while restoring only some of the subsidy for the non-poor. Sometime this week, Congress will vote. Then I'll know if I have to tell June that her sleepness nights and entrapped days are about to return.
Red Dye No. 3 is an artificial color additive that brightens cosmetics, drugs and foods - notably maraschino cherries. Animal tests show it is also a carcinogen. Whether the potentially dangerous dye remains on the market will be decided this week when House and Senate conferees complete the 1990 agriculture appropriations bill.
Present law prohibits the use of cancer-causing additives, and the Food and Drug Administration finally appeared ready a few months ago to outlaw Red Dye No. 3. But language stealthily added by Representative Vic Fazio of California, and approved in July without hearing or debate, seeks to postpone the action.
California fruit growers fear that removing the vibrant red color from cherries will cut demand for canned fruit cocktail, a big source of revenue for pear growers in Mr. Fazio's district. His amendment would instruct the F.D.A. to delay a ban pending further study.
Yet in vigorous testing since 1984, the fruit industry has been unable to prove the dye's safety. In any case, its only value is cosmetic. Why take the risk?
Is there something wrong with the way drugs are developed? The extortionate price of AIDS drugs suggests a system with serious faults. Drug companies, far from boldly accepting high risk for high reward, have to be cajoled with subsidies and monopolies into taking a chance. Once they hit a winner, they use their monopoly position to charge sky-high prices.
That, at least, is the pattern with the two leading AIDS drugs, AZT and pentamidine. When Washington sought a company to manufacture pentamidine, used for treating AIDS-related pneumonia, only one stepped forward, Lyphomed of Rosemont, Ill. As the sole pioneer, it clearly deserved a reward. But Lyphomed couldn't resist exploiting its seven-year exclusive license.
Prices should fall as volume rises. But Lyphomed introduced pentamidine at $25 a vial in 1984, and steadily jacked up the price, eventually increasing it to an extortionate $99.54, even as the number of likely customers soared.
The company argued that it had to spend $20 million on clinical trials to test the aerosol form of the drug, which is preferable to the injectable form. But this doesn't hold water. Lyphomed's first seven-year license, for the injectable form, ran from 1984 to 1991. The new form has won Lyphomed another seven-year monopoly until 1996. That's plenty of time to recoup investment and make a decent profit, without gouging desperate AIDS patients. The licenses were awarded under the Orphan Drug Act, which was designed to promote development of drugs for rare diseases with a small market.
AZT is a similar story. In 1984 the pharmaceutical industry was so pessimistic about the prospect of drugs effective against the AIDS virus that few companies responded to an invitation by Samuel Broder, now director of the National Cancer Institute, to test compounds in his laboratory. Burroughs Wellcome of North Carolina deserves credit for sending in AZT. But it did not invent AZT and, contrary to its claims, it was not the first to discover AZT's activity against AIDS-type viruses.
Government scientists took the risk of working with the AIDS virus, proved AZT was effective and at first provided all the necessary thymidine, a rare ingredient. To avoid any delay over legal and commercial rights, Burroughs Wellcome was allowed to claim a use patent as well as exclusive rights under the Orphan Drug Act. The company then astounded everyone by charging $10,000 a year from the outset, making AZT the most expensive prescription drug in history.
Burroughs Wellcome contended the high price was necessary because competitive drugs were expected shortly. None have come to market yet, three years later. And the number of patients has soared, especially now that preventive use of the drug is recommended. The price has been reduced twice by 20 percent, but the typical patient with advanced AIDS may still pay $6,400 a year.
The drug development system has worked: AZT and pentamidine are available and saving lives. But the principle that reward should be related to risk doesn't seem to hold. Burroughs Wellcome took a fraction of the usual risk yet grabbed for even greater reward than usual. Lyphomed has hungrily used its monopoly power to quadruple its price.
Their greed has given their industry a black eye that needs serious attention. Meanwhile AIDS patients, already burdened by a cruel disease and an inequitable health care system, are forced to pay top dollar for the drugs that keep them alive.
In a famous scene from the movie ''Five Easy Pieces,'' Jack Nicholson is told he cannot get a side order of toast in a restaurant. He comes up with a hostile and imaginative solution.
First he orders a chicken salad sandwich on toast. Then he instructs the waitress: ''No mayonnaise, no butter . . . and hold the chicken.''
Tomorrow, the House takes up a proposal to amend the controversial Medicare catastrophic health insurance program. Because well-to-do families resist a surtax, Congress is under enormous pressure to repeal the entire program. But the new proposal - like Mr. Nicholson's ''sandwich'' -would eliminate most of the benefits. Gone are the mayonnaise (coverage of large hospital bills), butter (coverage of large doctor bills) and chicken (nearly every other catastrophic cost). What is left is plain toast, a diminished drug benefit.
A second proposal, already approved by the House Ways and Means Committee, would at least preserve some of the chicken and remains the best alternative to repeal.
In 1988, Congress plugged a massive gap in medical insurance for the elderly. Medicare did not cover prescription drug bills or other medical costs when illnesses required treatment beyond a fixed time period. At the insistence of President Reagan, the program was made self-financing. A surtax of as much as $800 per person was imposed on middle- and upper-income families in order to subsidize coverage for the poor. That resulted in a revolt last spring, even though fewer than 6 percent of the elderly actually pay the maximum surtax. Congress now seeks to quench the rebellion while preserving some of the benefits.
The new proposal, sponsored by Representatives Pete Stark, Bill Gradison and Henry Waxman, would eliminate the surtax but also eliminate most of the benefits, especially during the first two years. In 1991, the prescription drug benefit would become available - for fewer than 20 percent of the elderly. If the Nicholson joke about a sandwich was funny, this Congressional joke about health care is cruel. The package may represent a victory for the middle- and upper-income families who would no longer pay the surtax, but it would constitute a painful loss for the poor who now enjoy the catastrophic coverage that the surtax subsidizes.
Messrs. Stark, Gradison and Waxman have honorable intentions. They like the existing catastrophic program. They would also accept the Ways and Means proposal to preserve many of the existing benefits by raising the monthly Medicare premium for everyone while cutting the surtax rate in half. They only propose further retreat because they fear the Ways and Means proposal may be as doomed as the existing program.
But their plan retreats too much. Catastrophic insurance is genuinely valuable. It is in trouble now because there are some retirees whose medical insurance, provided by their former employers, includes similar coverage for which they now pay little or nothing. The Federal program adds far more to their costs than it does to their benefits, and it is likely to do so as long as it must finance itself.
But their outrage is myopic. Every family - no matter how wealthy - remains heavily subsidized by the whole Medicare program. The Congressional Budget Office estimates that a 65-year-old who pays the maximum surtax will nevertheless receive benefits that exceed all past and current contributions by an average of nearly $1,000 per year - before counting the value of catastrophic benefits. Less wealthy families receive even higher subsidies. Congress has every reason to diminish subsidies for the well-to-do. That is exactly what the surtax does.
Representatives Stark, Gradison and Waxman are trying to preserve as much of the current catastrophic program as they can. But the proposal approved by Ways and Means remains the minimum meaningful program. It would at least keep some chicken in the chicken salad sandwich.
The new contract settlement negotiated between New York City hospitals and the hospital workers' union is costly to the industry, but fair to the workers. It provides 7.5 percent increases in each of the first two years and 5 percent in the third, with a $500 cash bonus to each worker in 1991. That's a generous wage package, so generous that the leaders of the city's municipal unions will inevitably try to use it as the model for their negotiations with City Hall next year.
Yet any attempt to do so would be misleading. The hospital contract has never set the pace for municipal union negotiations, and this time there's a stronger case than ever against direct ''linkage.''
The hospital workers took a beating in their last contract. Poor leadership won lower wage increases than city workers got. In fact, the hospital workers never even received one negotiated and scheduled wage increase, because it was predicated on state money that Albany never approved. So this new agreement is largely a catch-up settlement.
If one deducts from this settlement the increase the hospital workers should have received under the previous contract, the new agreement gives them raises only slightly above 5.5 percent in each of three years. That is similiar to what the city's unions got in their last negotiations, in 1987.
Still, the new settlement is likely to shadow next year's negotiations: the numbers sound good, and the wage package will bring some hospital salaries above those of city workers who do similar jobs. But to view the new settlement as the model for the coming municipal negotiations makes no fiscal sense. The cost would be a prohibitive $3 billion - $1 billion more than the cost of the current municipal workers' contract - at a time when City Hall is anticipating a huge budget deficit.
Ultimately, those negotiations will have to reflect the city's budgetary realities. Trying to pattern them on the hospital industry can only hurt the always complicated process of labor negotiations, and mislead thousands of city workers.
Congress's decision to drastically cut back on valuable benefits of the 1988 catastrophic-health insurance program generated cheers from the well-to-do elderly who opposed the law. They didn't want to pay the surtax that finances it. But curtailing the program also means that millions will lose. In the wake of the defeat, those losers deserve attention.
The 1988 law provided that Medicare, the Federal health insurance for the elderly, would cover large hospital, doctor and prescription drug bills. All this was to be financed by a combination of additional premiums and a surtax on Medicare clients earning more than $13,150 per year. While no one denied the value of the benefits, those required to pay the surtax rebelled. As a result the House voted this week to repeal the whole program, and the Senate passed a measure sponsored by John McCain, Republican of Arizona, that eliminates the surtax and strips the benefits to the barest minimum: payment of some large hospital bills.
It is important to keep that victory in perspective. Fewer than 6 percent of the 33.4 million Medicare beneficiaries are subject to the maximum annual surtax of $800. The typical surtax is only $300. Most on Medicare - 60 percent - pay no surtax. Some have a special complaint: they already receive catastrophic-health insurance at little or no cost as a work or retirement benefit. For them the program represents pure cost and little value.
The elderly who pay the surtax indignantly ask why they alone should bear the burden of subsidizing medical insurance for the poor. The answer is simple: They don't. Even the wealthiest enrollees - those paying the maximum surtax - receive more from Medicare than they contribute. For a typical 65-year-old paying the maximum, this subsidy will be about $1,000 a year for life, even without the benefit of catastrophic insurance.
The losers, meanwhile, are going to lose plenty. Each year hundreds of thousands of the elderly need skilled nursing facilities; more than two million spend more than $1,370 a year on doctors and other outpatient services; millions more spend in excess of $600 on prescription drugs. For help with such expenses, the low-income elderly did not have to pay the surtax and were subject only to increased monthly premiums totaling $59 a year.
That brought invaluable peace of mind to the man with life-threatening emphysema or advanced stomach cancer, the woman whose husband had developed Alzheimer's. Such common illnesses of aging are financial catastrophes for the poor.
The more affluent elderly can protect themselves by purchasing private insurance costing $200 per year or more for equivalent catastrophic coverage. Those who can't afford this expense must fend for themselves. In most cases, that means exhausting meager savings in order to qualify for Medicaid, the Federal health insurance for the poor. Health care must be purchased at the price of impoverishment and indignity.
Without the catastrophic-health care program, the elderly poor will have trouble sleeping at night. For other reasons, so might the affluent elderly who defeated it.
When the Supreme Court upheld Missouri's restrictions on abortion this summer, the right-to-life movement cheered a major victory. Right-to-lifers saw the decision as the first step toward abolishing any legally protected right to end a pregnancy. Events this week in Florida and in Washington suggest that the cheering was premature.
The Court's decision began a process of returning the abortion issue to the political arena. Fortunately, it now appears that the right-to-lifers have no lock on politics.
Yesterday the House of Representatives, in a dramatic shift, voted to liberalize limits it had placed on federally subsidized abortions in 1981. Under the measure, previously passed by the Senate, Federal money could pay poor women for abortions of pregnancies resulting from rape or incest.
The House vote came just as Florida gave stunning new evidence that the public was not about to grant abortion foes automatic support. Immediately after the Missouri decision, Gov. Bob Martinez of Florida rushed to summon a special session of the legislature to impose new limits that the high court now would permit. But this right-to-life crusade quickly turned into a shambles. This week the special session rejected 10 anti-abortion measures, 5 of them proposed by the Governor.
One bill would have banned the use of state centers and employees in performing abortions; another required a seven-day waiting period before the procedure could be undertaken. A third restricted abortions to cases of rape or incest, risk to the mother or fetal deformity. All that followed a new ruling by the Florida Supreme Court that struck down a year-old law requiring parental or judicial consent for abortions sought by girls under 18. The Florida court found that the law violated privacy rights guaranteed by the State Constitution.
Meanwhile the U.S. Supreme Court gave abortion opponents a new reason for second thoughts about violence. The Court refused to review a lower court decision against a group of protesters liable under the Federal racketeering law for damages to a Philadelphia abortion clinic. The clinic, which eventually lost its lease, had been picketed three times a week for nine years. On four occasions the protesters forced their way into the building. The decision should have a cooling effect on the sometimes violent harassment of clinics.
''A right, having been established, is not easily removed,'' said Tom Gustafson, Florida's House Speaker, of his legislature's vote. The lawmakers were only reflecting what a large public majority feels about abortion rights: a recent New York Times/CBS News Poll found that 62 percent of Floridians favored keeping the law as it is now.
It is regrettable that so personal a matter as abortion has become the subject of political combat. But as long as it is, events in the House and in Florida make it powerfully clear that pro-choice groups are not to be underestimated. They may not always prevail, but they are as capable as right-to-lifers of shrewd, aggressive public-relations campaigns. More important, they can count on the backing of a considerable majority - of people who properly aren't about to let government intrude on a woman's private decision about a pregnancy.
A draft report by a committee of Catholic bishops strongly rejects the use of condoms to retard the spread of the AIDS virus. Every religion has the right to set its own doctrine without interference. But when doctrine affects public health, that's everyone's business.
''Not only is the use of prophylactics . . . technically unreliable; promoting this approach means, in effect, promoting behavior which is morally unacceptable,'' says the committee, headed by Archbishop Roger Mahony of Los Angeles. These are two different arguments: when the first, on public health, is correctly stated, it refutes the second, on moral behavior.
Condoms are not perfectly reliable in preventing either conception or transmission of viruses. But when properly used, they heavily reduce the chances of both. ''Since we are now facing disastrous numbers of people who are already infected, it's too bad to obfuscate that point,'' notes June Osborn, head of the National Commission on AIDS. The bishops' advice would undermine the efforts of public health authorities who are trying to increase condom use. This remains limited, particularly among the populations most at risk.
As to the committee's second argument, morality surely dictates the use of condoms. An infected person who does not use condoms endangers the lives of others. How can that be morally acceptable? No one challenges the bishops' right to rule for their congregations on what modes of sexual behavior are countenanced by doctrine. But the consequences of human sexual behavior, whether approved or not, are a matter of public health.
Catholic bishops are meeting in Baltimore in November to review Archbishop Mahony's report. It would be forthright of them at least to acknowledge that their draft position conflicts squarely with the public health strategy for combating AIDS. Their duty to the wider community is to insure that Catholics who may choose not to follow doctrine do not endanger the lives of others.
To the Editor:
I was interested in your editorial Topic ''Bedside Lawyers'' (Oct. 11), applauding the efforts of lawyers from large New York firms who write probate documents at local hospitals for persons with AIDS. The AIDS Legal Council of Chicago has sponsored a ''wills clinic'' at the Sable-Sherer clinic of Cook County Hospital, which treats outpatients with HIV disease. The clinic is only one component of the council's program to provide a full spectrum of sensitive legal services to persons facing HIV discrimination and financial problems associated with catastrophic illness.
Writing probate documents for persons affected by HIV is only one area where legal expertise is needed. People with AIDS may be working and insured vis-a-vis employment. They want their insurance company to cover drugs and therapies the companies are reluctant to pay for (because they are ''experimental'' or not ''medically necessary'').
Once they become too sick to work, patients are often unable to pay bills and may need counseling. If they have assets to protect, they may need assistance filing for bankruptcy. Some are still having difficulty obtaining Social Security benefits.
It is laudable that large firms devote resources to help stigmatized and disabled clients. However, apart from preparation of simple wills, a greater diversity of legal resources must be mobilized to fight HIV discrimination. We find that large corporations (including insurance companies) have spread out their work among so many large firms as to preclude them from representing clients facing HIV discrimination. As you know, lawyers are ethically barred from representing persons who have interests adverse to their clients. Consequently, it is difficult for clients facing HIV discrimination to access large firm resources. The legal profession must insure that those facing HIV discrimination, particularly by large corporations, have their day in court. If large firms cannot represent clients directly, they can give money to not-for-profit legal services.  JAMES MONROE SMITH  Exec. Dir., AIDS Legal Council  Chicago, Oct. 12, 1989
The language that Jesse Helms insisted on inserting into legislation appropriating money for AIDS prevention could condemn many innocent people to death. Congress needs to take a second look.
The Helms amendment was attached to the Health and Human Services Department appropriations bill. It begins by banning use of funds, without Presidential permission, to give sterile needles to drug addicts.
The amendment appealed to many senators. Because AIDS spreads as addicts share needles, some public health officials favor distributing sterile syringes to inhibit the disease. That's controversial: needles are not always easy to obtain; giving them away may facilitate drug abuse.
But the Helms amendment goes on. It would also restrict funds for distribution of bleach to clean addicts' needles. AIDS prevention workers have arisen in protest. Because they are so rarely permitted to distribute needles, AIDS prevention programs encourage addicts to keep needles clean with bleach, often giving out small quantities along with lectures on drug abuse and AIDS.
There is no basis for asserting, with Mr. Helms, that giving out bleach condones drug abuse in the same way giving out needles might. Cleaning with bleach complicates the injection of drugs and reinforces the fear of needles. Outreach that begins with bleach may wind up persuading addicts to seek treatment.
Language banning bleach was contained in the anti-drug abuse act passed in 1988, but it attracted little notice because it applied only to Federal drug treatment funds. Most AIDS prevention programs are financed with money for public health - H.H.S. spent nearly $100 million on AIDS prevention last year. The Helms amendment, affecting that money, would vastly expand the ban on bleach.
Giving out bleach protects drug addicts and also their sex partners and children, now showing up on the AIDS wards in alarming numbers. Whatever Congress thinks about needles, the ban on bleach is murderous mischief.
Congress is moving to control the relentless escalation of Medicare payments to doctors. Different versions of the plan, known as expenditure targets, or E.T., have been approved by committees in both the House and Senate. The Senate version settles for puffery; the House plan merits support.
Physician reimbursements under Medicare, the Federal health insurance for the elderly, have been rising by about 15 percent a year. Previous efforts to limit amounts Medicare would pay for given procedures have not controlled total costs. Doctors began billing for more procedures; growing numbers of the elderly and expensive new technologies generated higher volume. But some volume was also due to unnecessary procedures encouraged by Medicare's lax reimbursement rules.
That is what the present reform proposals are designed to overcome. First, the physician fees would be set by formula to reflect the time, training and skill that a doctor needs to perform a procedure. The legislation also sharply limits what a doctor may charge a patient beyond the amount Medicare will reimburse. Finally, national expenditure targets would be established for total billings by surgeons and non-surgeons. In the version passed by the Senate Finance Committee, the target is merely a theoretical goal. But the House Ways and Means version attempts enforcement: if outlays in a year exceed the targets, then physician fees the next year will be set lower. Expenditure targets are set for the entire nation, not any one doctor. So any reduced fees would affect the doctor who billed reasonably along with the one who pads. Individual targets cannot be set because they might force doctors to reject additional patients or even not perform justifiable procedures.
To make the plan work, proponents of E.T. are relying on peer oversight. If fees have to be reduced because of excessive billings, the theory goes, that will create an incentive for medical societies to monitor their members and reprimand big billers.
Will peer oversight be sufficient? Until E.T. is tried, the question cannot be answered. The connection between billings and fee schedules might be tighter if expenditure targets were set regionally or locally rather than nationally. But that would introduce complexities that Congress was right to avoid for now. Once the simpler system is in place, regional targets may be worth trying.
E.T. does present some risks. If poorly managed, political control over medical fees could cause havoc. If, for example, Congress succumbs to pressure and sets fees too low, physicians might abandon the elderly.
Still, physician reimbursements under Medicare continue to career out of control with no other feasible reform in sight. The House approach, with its enforcement provision, deserves a try.
Federal law requires the Food and Drug Administration to outlaw cancer-causing food dyes. Yet the agency has for years postponed action against Red Dye No. 3, despite evidence that the dye, widely used to brighten cosmetics and foods, induces thyroid tumors in animals. The latest extension ends Jan. 29. So should the dawdling.
Last spring, fully five years after F.D.A. scientists concluded that Red Dye No. 3. was a carcinogen, the agency served notice that it was preparing to outlaw the additive. But then Representative Vic Fazio of California, sensitive to the interests of fruit growers, tossed a monkey wrench. He inserted language in the agriculture appropriations bill instructing the F.D.A. to put off action pending further study. Fortunately, Senator Wyche Fowler of Georgia blocked the delaying tactic in conference committee.
Fruit growers have lobbied to keep using the dye to color the cherries in fruit cocktail. They fear that removing it will reduce consumer demand for the product. But in years of testing, they have been unable to prove the dye's safety.
Surely Americans can be re-educated to enjoy fruit cocktail with less colorful cherries. The F.D.A.'s concern, in any case, ought to be protecting against needless risk.
Not so long ago, the possibility of organ transplants was the stuff of ''Frankenstein.'' The notion that a baby could be conceived in a petri dish was far-fetched. Today, both are realities.
Now another medical breakthrough is on the horizon: Transplanted fetal tissue can facilitate the research now being done on Parkinson's disease, Huntington's chorea, childhood diabetes, perhaps even Alzheimer's disease. Study of fetal cells could aid treatment of cancer.
But while two Federal advisory panels concluded last year that there was nothing immoral about using fetal tissue from induced abortions in such research, the Bush Administration has just extended a 20-month ban on Federal financing.
Dr. James Mason, Assistant Secretary for Health in the Department of Health and Human Services, asserts that the research pits the rights of fetuses against those of patients. He felt obliged to rule for the former. Women considering an abortion, he continued, might be swayed by the idea that the tissue would help medical research. Since fetal tissue is far from scarce - there are nearly 1.6 million abortions in the United States every year - Dr. Mason's scenario is unlikely. Furthermore, the law that bans the sale of human organs could be readily amended to ban the sale of fetal tissue as well, thus eliminating any financial incentive for terminating a pregnancy.
The Federal panels recommended such a ban, along with a ban on Federal funding of experimental transplants performed with fetal tissue provided by a patient's family or friends - this to address worries about deliberate pregnancies and abortions to provide fetal tissue for an ailing relation.
Because of the ban on Federal funding, experiments in several fields are said to be suffering. Yet to interfere with those experiments is to interfere with progress that could save countless lives.
State legislatures and courts have responded thoughtfully to agonizing questions raised by other medical advances. The Bush Administration could bring honor to itself by showing similar sense and compassion about fetal tissue research.
A young man stares wanly from a hospital bed banked in balloons, flowers and an old straw hat . . . The drawer of a vanity table opens on a row of glass vials, the kind usually used for blood samples . . . A writer rages at ''seeing death coming in from the edges of abstraction where those with the luxury of time have cast it.''
Are these images obscene? Hardly. All that is shocking about an art show focused on AIDS and called ''Witnesses: Against Our Vanishing'' is the cruelty of the illness it reflects. But because of this show, John Frohnmayer, the new director of the National Endowment for the Arts, found himself between a rock and a hard place. In trying to get out of it he dug himself a very deep hole. Yesterday, to his credit, he backed up - and climbed out.
Mr. Frohnmayer has just taken office in what may be the worst time in the Endowment's 24-year history. Last summer Senator Jesse Helms, the vengeful North Carolina conservative, wanted to insure that the Endowment never again paid for art that might offend public taste - that is, his taste. And he had been mightily offended by an exhibit of Robert Mapplethorpe's photographs. The Senator's solution: to destroy the peer-review process established to insulate arts grants from coarse political pressures.
Congress wisely declined his proposal to bar Federal funds to ''promote, disseminate or produce obscene or indecent materials'' and to bar grants for artwork that ''denigrates, debases or reviles a person, group or class of citizens on the basis of race, creed, sex, handicap, age or national origin.'' But Congress compromised with a milder but still mischievous new law barring funding for material that ''may be considered obscene . . . and which, when taken as a whole, does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.'' That may sound tame, even reasonable. But even this law has cast a big chill over an arts community already hypercautious about spending public money.
The chill extended to Susan Wyatt, executive director of Artists Space in New York, which had received $10,000 in Federal funds for the ''Witnesses'' show. She warned Mr. Frohnmayer of the show's potential for controversy, saying she didn't want him to be ''blindsided'' - and also wanted to expose the tangle created by any Federal effort to dictate the content of art.
A tangle indeed. Mr. Frohnmayer withdrew the grant, saying at first that the show was more political than artistic, and citing criticism contained in an essay in the catalogue. A few days later Mr. Frohnmayer said his decision to withdraw support was based instead on ''an erosion of the artistic focus.'' The next day he altered his view again, and promised to work for the removal of the new restrictions. Yesterday he re-awarded the $10,000 grant to Artists Space.
''We are feeling our way along in a situation which none of us really wanted, under a law which none of us think is necessary,'' Mr. Frohnmayer said, finally finding firm ground. If, like the director of the Corcoran Gallery before him, he first showed fear of the powerful Mr. Helms, he is showing courage now. By returning the funds he loses some face; but he gains precious credibility.
A Congress more conscious of public health and nutrition is finally moving to toughen food labeling rules. Legislation just approved by a House Energy and Commerce subcommittee would require more explicit nutrition information on package labels. But the bill would still permit misleading nutrition claims on packages.
The measure, sponsored by Representative Henry Waxman, would require uniform listing of saturated fat, cholesterol and fiber on almost all packaged foods, a big advance. But amendments pressed by the food industry leave room for confusion. For example, manufacturers could still label as ''dietary'' frozen dinners that contain excessive fat. Supporters of the provision say Congress shouldn't be in the business of dictating brand names and package copy. But tighter regulation would more likely encourage companies to improve their ingredients.
There's still time for the full House committee to close loopholes that threaten public health.
The National Endowment for the Arts's temporary withdrawal of funds for a show focused on AIDS produced a flurry of words - none more sensible than from the object of criticism in the show's catalogue.
Criticism of John Cardinal O'Connor and several other public figures prompted John Frohnmayer, the new director of the Endowment, to withdraw funding for ''Witnesses: Against Our Vanishing.'' Mr. Frohnmayer said the critical comments made the ''Witnesses'' show political.
But if Cardinal O'Connor's views on the AIDS plague provoke dissent, few would quarrel with his defense of free speech.
''Had I been consulted I would have urged very strongly that the National Endowment not withdraw its sponsorship on the basis of criticism against me personally,'' the Cardinal said. ''I do not consider myself exempt from or above criticism by anyone.''
Mr. Frohnmayer wisely reversed his decision on funding the show. He would be wise to adopt the Cardinal's sentiment as well.
In last week's rush to adjourn, Congress took a bold step forward and a giant leap backward on medical insurance for the elderly. The step forward was a system to control total physician billings. The leap backward was repeal of catastrophic health insurance - which protected the elderly against bankrupting medical bills.
Physician reimbursements under Medicare -the Federal health insurance for the elderly and disabled - have been rising by about 15 percent per year. Part of the inflation is due to uncontrollable factors: a growing population of retirees and new medical technologies. But part is due to an increase in superfluous tests and procedures. Medicare now gives little incentive to limit expensive tests that have only marginal medical value.
The new legislation tries to solve this problem by establishing a fee schedule that limits how much Medicare will reimburse doctors for individual procedures. The law also limits how much a doctor can charge a Medicare patient above the scheduled amount. In addition, the law sets national annual targets for total physician billings. If billings in a year exceed the target, then the reimbursement schedule for the next year will be reduced.
Under this system, doctors who bill for unnecessary procedures wind up hurting their colleagues. That is supposed to motivate medical societies to monitor their members and reprimand abusers.
These ''expenditure targets'' may not work. A better law would impose the targets more locally. But the basic strategy is a sound way to address excess physician billings. The measure is worth approving in order to establish the concept in law -perhaps subject to refinements as experience makes clearer how expenditure targets can work.
Catastrophic insurance, which began last January, was designed to reimburse the elderly for large medical bills that are not covered under Medicare. To pay for the program, Congress raised Medicare premiums by about $60 per year and imposed a separate surtax on elderly individuals with annual incomes above $16,000. The typical surtax is $300 per year, reaching a maximum of $800 for those with incomes in excess of $43,000.
The families paying the surtax rebelled and forced Congress to repeal the entire program. They resented subsidizing insurance for the poor and paying for benefits that many already received from former employers.
Lost in the furor was the fact that every Medicare recipient - even the wealthiest - is heavily subsidized by the general taxpayer. The surtax reduced, but did not eliminate, this unjustified subsidy for middle-income and affluent families.
While Congress repealed catastrophic insurance, it cannot repeal catastrophic illness. And the public will continue to pay for it, through the Federal Medicaid insurance program, when the victims are poor. Many of the retirees who complained about the Federal surtax are soon going to have a new complaint - about increases in their premiums for private insurance against catastrophic medical costs. They will face the choice of paying those premiums or accepting that costly illness could force them into destitution.
America's aged are entitled to both health care and freedom from the indignity of forced poverty. Congress might respond with a new catastrophic program that subsidizes coverage for the poor with general taxes rather than a surtax on the middle-and upper-income elderly. Or it might make available unsubsidized insurance. Or it might pursue the issue in the context of a more comprehensive national health insurance plan.
Whatever form the response may take, the demise of catastrophic insurance makes the aged-health care issue more urgent than ever.
One of the many things I have never been able to get interested in is what's going on in my arteries, which may explain why my attention always wanders when the conversation turns to cholesterol.
I can't help noticing, however, that there is turmoil in the cholesterol world lately. Somebody medical has apparently said ''Cholesterol, shmolesterol!'' or words to that effect.
This has naturally outraged all those medical people whose aim is to make us all live until we can't stand it anymore so they can demonstrate their ethical superiority by forcing us to stay harnessed to life-support systems until the centuries are used up.
Not that I am eager for Kingdom Come, mind you. I'm all for this world as long as I have liver enough to cope with an ice-cold martini and enough olfactory nerve to smell the honeysuckle on a June evening.
If you cannot do anything better than feel good about your cholesterol, you are close to the bottom of life's barrel. Lately I encounter more and more people nearing this terminal condition, and not doddering geezers either, but people robust enough to fling themselves at life if they wanted to.
Instead of going at it with zest, what are they doing but brooding about cholesterol? Recently I fell in with two old acquaintances who, when we first met, didn't even know they had cholesterol.
They know now. Boy, do they know! Were they interested in trading Quayle jokes? Not a bit. They wanted to dilate on their cholesterol numbers and the difference between ''bad cholesterol'' and ''good cholesterol.''
The stuff is rated by number and quality. If your number is over 200 you are marked for early departure unless it is ''good cholesterol.'' Of course you may still foil the Reaper by signing up for life on hay and yogurt and exercising until your pulse rate is as negligible as the wit suffusing the usual cholesterol conversation.
Somewhere I heard that the distinction between ''good'' and ''bad'' cholesterol is fairly new and that it was all ''bad'' at first. Now the latest development is this doctor's quarrel about whether cholesterol really matters much one way or the other, longevity-wise.
This conforms to a basic law governing the progress of things that are good for you and things that are bad for you. The practically immutable rule is this:
Almost everything they say is good for you will turn out to be bad for you if you hang around long enough, and almost everything they say is bad for you will turn out not to matter.
A classic illustration is the not-so-old ''good breakfast,'' which everybody eager for rosy health was urged to eat before cholesterol came along. Its main elements were bacon, eggs, buttered toast, milk and coffee.
Then came cholesterol, and bacon, eggs, butter and milk were all proscribed as silent killers. The ''good breakfast'' was not good for you anymore. Coffee was not condemned until later, when the health police nailed it for transmitting the evils of caffeine. It was now widely replaced by decaffeinated coffee with murmurs of ''good for you.'' Then just the other day came the inevitable news from health headquarters: Decaffeinated coffee is now scientifically declared bad for you.
People young enough to care intensely about their arteries will be amazed to learn there was a time in the memory of living humanity when cholesterol was a subject of absolutely no interest to anyone, except possibly a few scientists.
In 1939 it was impossible to get anyone involved in a good chat about the old arteries. Yes, people in that day knew they had arteries and knew arteries ''hardened'' and might let you down with fatal results.
But all that about fatty deposits, sludge clogging the walls and the life-preserving qualities of polyunsaturated oils - all that would have made you seem a tedious eccentric if you had tried to pass it off in a typical tiresome medical chat of that age.
It was the interior of the stomach, not the arteries, that fascinated America in that day. Stomach ulcer was the terror that blighted life for the dynamic male. (Females tended toward gall bladder catastrophes, but I never heard or saw the interior of the gall bladder described. Proof of the era's cruel sexism, perhaps.) Stomach ulcer did not lose its eminence until the 1950's, when President Eisenhower's cardiac troubles moved national attention to another part of the innards. If cholesterol had not existed, it would have had to be invented. Now some people are saying maybe it was.
OBSERVER
New Jersey's promise of prenatal care to all pregnant women, including those with no medical insurance, merits close examination and emulation. No state, or nation, could make a sounder investment in its future.
New Jersey is not alone in having to contend with a high rate of infant mortality. The national rate is about 10 deaths per 1,000 births; New Jersey's rate is 9 per 1,000. Infant deaths in New Jersey and elsewhere are closely linked to low birthweight. And those low-birthweight babies who survive generally need in-patient hospital care and are likely to face permanent handicaps.
Thus the importance of prenatal care. It saves infant lives and also saves money: just one dollar spent on prenatal care may reduce by three dollars the costs of caring for a surviving baby after birth.
In New Jersey, as in New York, the Federal-state Medicaid program of health insurance for the poor now provides prenatal and infant care for some low-income women and children.
But many are left with no access to care. They are not eligible for Medicaid and have no other health insurance. And the problem in New York and New Jersey is duplicated across the United States.
New Jersey now will give such women better prenatal services under a program called Maternity Outreach and Managed Services, or Jersey MOMS. The program, initiated by Dr. Molly Joel Coye, New Jersey's Health Commissioner, will provide managed or comprehensive health and nutrition services, counseling and home visits to all pregnant women.
Those with incomes up to 150 percent of the poverty level (or about $18,000) will receive the services free. Women earning from 150 to 250 percent of the poverty level will pay according to a sliding scale. Dr. Coye figures that those fees plus existing state funds make possible coverage of 10,500 uninsured women, in addition to 25,000 women already receiving care under Medicaid.
Better coordination and more extensive provision of prenatal services could even reduce the state's annual expenditures on uninsured pregnant women.
New Jersey's MOMS ought to set a national example. Every child needs a healthy mom, certainly, and every state could use a well-run MOMS.
Federal District Judge Robert Sweet adds his voice to those who call for legalization of drugs, along with George Shultz, the former Secretary of State; William F. Buckley, the columnist; Mayor Kurt Schmoke of Baltimore, and Milton Friedman, the economist. But the judge offers no persuasive new insights. Instead he demonstrates how frustration with the drug problem clouds common sense.
Judge Sweet is exasperated by ''seeing our justice system overwhelmed by a social phenomena.'' Legalizing drugs, he asserts, would immediately relieve the burden on law enforcement and free billions of dollars for drug prevention and treatment. That's a superficially seductive argument that ignores fact.
Justice is overwhelmed mainly because, despite all the declarations of a War On Drugs, government hasn't begun to provide the necessary resources. In that sense, to call for legalized drugs now is to surrender without a serious fight.
But even if society had begun to fight, the argument for legalization remains deeply flawed. Its supporters acknowledge the need for regulation; they typically envision addicts lining up for drugs during business hours at a public dispensary. Such a system may be plausible for heroin. Addicts maintained on regular daily doses can lead normal lives. Thousands already do so on methadone.  But the current besetting curse is crack, and crack is different. Addicts binge on it, rather than nodding off regularly. To satisfy crack addicts, a dispensary would have to be open at all hours, and serve all customers, no questions asked. To regulate supply would defeat the goal of reducing the law enforcement burden. Criminal gangs would rush to serve all who prefer to avoid the rules.
The alternative to regulation is free access to crack. But that would likely produce a surge of new addiction - and a health catastrophe.
Crack use causes paranoia, often violent, that continues after the drug wears off. Women reluctant to inject heroin are quick to smoke crack. As a result, crack has generated a horrendous wave of child abuse. The exchange of sex for crack by binging addicts spreads syphilis and AIDS.
All these ugly trends would grow dramatically if crack were more freely available. Promoters of legalization say maybe not. But there is little evidence to support so stupendous a contradiction of common sense.
In the end, Judge Sweet thinks legalization, and the shifting of money to drug treatment and attacks on broader social problems, could produce a healthier America. Yet drug treatment for crack remains in the primitive stages, and cures for broader social ills are far from clear. The judge bases his optimism on the current public interest in diet. ''If our society can learn to stop using butter,'' he says, ''it should be able to cut down on cocaine.''
That is an airy, remote response to the victims of crack: the underweight, addicted infant struggling for life in intensive care . . . the battered child awaiting a foster home . . . the deranged homeless man picking fights in a city shelter . . . the AIDS patient slowly dying in a crowded hospital ward.
Those who call for legal crack can do so only by averting their eyes from these realities, and from the first requirement of a War On Drugs: to fight.
To the Editor:
''The Limits of Medicare'' (editorial, Nov. 27) once again asserts that ''the families paying the surtax  [ for Medicare catastrophe insurance ]  rebelled . . . they resented subsidizing insurance for the poor and paying for benefits that many already received from former employers.'' Though stated as fact, that assertion is only theory. It is one of the many possible explanations for resentment.
Some of us, not yet Medicare beneficiaries, opposed the financing mechanism, believing that while a social insurance program such as Medicare should involve transfers to assist low-income persons, these transfers or subsidies should be paid for by affluent individuals of all ages. We believe in principles of community and in acts of sharing. Our definition of ''community'' is broader than that utilized in the Medicare catastrophic legislation; we think of Americans regardless of age as members of the American community; the law defined community in terms of age (only the old would be subject to the surtax). The unwillingness of the general population to share in the costs of the catastrophic program represented an implicit redefinition of the term ''community'' that many Americans of all ages found a troubling development.
The young charge the elderly, who presumably were unwilling to pay for the poor, with being selfish. It could as easily be asserted that it is the young who are selfish: Have they supported legislation requiring that they help pay for the costs of catastrophic care of the less affluent (including young disabled)?
Congress has not seen fit to enact a tax that would ask all of us, of all ages, to finance universal health care. Surely the prospects for legislation that addresses financing issues in more comprehensive fashion are not enhanced by ascribing base motives to those who advocated restructuring catastrophic insurance because they believe its flawed financing provisions set an undesirable and dangerous precedent. RASHI FEIN  Boston, Nov. 27, 1989  The writer is professor of medical economics, Harvard Medical School.
On Nov. 27, Baby Boy W. was born in Brooklyn four weeks early and with test signs of cocaine and syphilis. He is the youngest of three children whose mother is an unemployed crack addict who has dropped out of drug treatment. She has not seen Baby Boy W. since his birth and he is now a candidate for adoption. But who will adopt such a child?
The number of abused and neglected children is soaring in New York City, straining the foster care system. The most poignant victims, like Baby Boy W., are the children of drug-abusing mothers. But laws, regulations and practices deny even less-troubled foster children, from toddlers to teen-agers, the chance to grow up in a stable environment. Mayor-elect David Dinkins faces several principal priorities when he takes over next week, including unusual fiscal care. But none can be more urgent than doing better by these children. Even assuming there is a social safety net, these are blameless victims who have fallen through.
New York's child welfare problems are not unique. A recent Congressional study found that child abuse, drug and alcohol abuse and homelessness are contributing to the increasing numbers of children in costly out-of-home placements. For New York City, the figures are sobering. In 1977, the city's foster care population was about 23,700. Then the population began to decline, probably because child welfare experts worked harder to keep families together. But in 1985, as is clear from the accompanying graph, the trend reversed. Now the figure is 38,000; it could top 50,000 within a year.
Complaints of child abuse and neglect have risen to 60,000 this year, from 18,500 in 1979, and children are coming into the foster care system at a younger age. Some 58 percent of children entering the system are now under the age of 6, an increase of 11 percentage points in only three years. This year, about 4,800 babies will be born to drug-addicted mothers, making them almost certain candidates for foster care.
Child welfare experts unanimously blame crack, which is much more popular with women than is heroin, for the recent surge in the foster care caseload. As Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan says, child welfare used to concern the one-parent family. Now, largely because of drugs, it concerns the no-parent child.
As caseloads grow, so do horror stories from the city's Human Resources Administration. Children are removed from abusive parents and placed with poorly supervised foster families who often abuse them more, sometimes to death . . . Children languish for years in foster homes when they could be adopted . . . City Council President Andrew Stein cites heart-rending cases of children placed with foster parents prepared to adopt, only to be yanked away and returned to their severely troubled natural mothers.
The reasons for such failures are numerous and complex. The city and state argue about which should pay for which services to children. The child welfare law is interpretable as putting a mother's rights before those of her child. Child welfare agencies generally prefer to place children in individual families rather than develop more small group facilities. There is a continuing need to train and motivate many more caseworkers.
Beneath all these issues lies the basic structural problem that has troubled the Human Resources Administration for years. Unlike most cities, New York relies heavily on private, sectarian agencies to care for foster children. About 70 agencies offer expertise and well-run facilities, and the city provides them with more than $650 million in contracts.
In theory, the city is supposed to be in charge. In practice, the agencies wield great power. Until a decade ago, H.R.A. did not even formally evaluate them. The agencies, set up for a foster care problem of a different era, have been slow to adjust.
Right now, they conspicuously underserve three populations: babies of drug-addicted mothers, children with special medical needs and children with severe behavioral problems. As their numbers grow, the city has begun programs to serve them directly - a still tenuous attempt to maintain control of child welfare policy over the more selective interests of the private agencies.
The Dinkins administration needs to understand the importance of controlling the sectarian agencies more closely, for the stakes are large.
Foster care constitutes a crisis. How can a purportedly decent society cast its youngest, most vulnerable members adrift into a no-parent world? But that's what this society is doing. When no one pays enough attention to physical, educational and emotional needs of children, eventually, everyone will pay dearly.
The population of these children, abandoned in all but name, is growing and changing too fast for the systems in place to help them. That hard fact casts an alarming shadow over the city's future.
Finally, the latest Federal budget reconciliation act requires states to expand Medicaid coverage for children. Better still, Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York is studying proposals to take the state beyond that - to contemplating universal health coverage for children from the prenatal stage to age 21.
Such a program would put New York well ahead of New Jersey, which recently guaranteed prenatal care to all pregnant women, and make the Empire State a leader of what needs to be a national trend - even in a difficult budget year.
According to the Campaign for Healthy Children, a joint project of the American Academy of Pediatrics and the private Statewide Youth Advocacy Inc., more than 700,000 New Yorkers under 21 are uninsured. An additional 600,000 are underinsured: their parents' health policies, written with adult needs in mind, do not cover well-child doctor visits, immunizations or other routine care.
These services are available in hospitals but at far greater cost to the taxpayers. Medicaid itself contributes to the problem. In New York the Medicaid reimbursement rate for a doctor visit ranges from $7 to $19.50; for patients on private insurance the rates are $25 to $50. Because of the disparity, many private physicians simply won't accept Medicaid patients, who end up using hospital emergency rooms or clinics. But treatment in those settings costs up to twice what it does in a doctor's office, and the taxpayer pays.
The Campaign for Healthy Children would require every employer to provide appropriate health coverage for the children of employees. For the most part, this would mean primary care - immunizations and well-child visits to family physicians - in addition to the usual hospitalization coverage. The campaign also calls for Medicaid to pay ''usual and customary'' fees for doctor visits, so that children covered under the program can have real access to private physicians.
For children who remain uncovered by either Medicaid or employer-provided insurance, a New York State Children's Health Plan would be created, possibly financed by a tax on employers who do not provide health coverage to their employees.
Cost estimates for all this have ranged from as little as $500 per child per year up to $1,300. Officials in the state Social Services Department refuse even to make an estimate. There is equal reluctance to talk about financing methods, since every alternative has a host of ramifications.
Nevertheless, it is encouraging that the Governor is studying the issue and may offer a proposal in January. New Yorkers - indeed all Americans -have to think of children's health in the same way they think of education: as fundamental to proper growth and productive citizenship.
It makes you cough. It makes you sweat. It makes you stare aimlessly at telephones you can't find the strength to dial and at television channels you haven't the energy to switch. It makes ''phlegm'' the buzzword of the week and possibly -heaven forfend - of the month. It's the thing that's going around.
This, more surely than a marriage ceremony, club membership or a shared astrological sign, is the tie that binds. Strangers, barking loudly, exchange glances across a crowded bus. Sufferers discuss their symptoms; survivors prescribe their cures. At midnight, countless sleepers wake and reach for their cough medicine. What is this thing? It is this year's cold. But isn't it so that a cold is a cold is a cold? No. To those who have them, colds are as different as snowflakes. There is the cold in the head with running eyes, and the cold in the head without running eyes. There is the cold in the head with the attendant earache, and the cold in the head with the attendant burning brain. This is the year of the cold that sits - like a big, damp frog - on the chest.
In truth, it is really the flu, and most likely one of three strains, each of which has an exotic provenance. How the imagination trembles at the names Taiwan . . . Shanghai . . . Yamagata! And while its intensity varies, its longevity is in direct proportion to its victim's propensity for working, partying and hanging around smoke-filled rooms.
Working, partying and hanging around smoke-filled rooms being a holiday hazard, it's no surprise that many victims cite Dec. 23 as the day they first felt that funny tickle in the back of the throat. How long will it be before they no longer need fear a relapse? Not till - sob! - March.
''When [abortion]  was illegal, the fear was of losing my medical license and going to prison. I had numerous blackmail attempts and people pulled guns on me,'' Dr. Curtis Boyd told a New York Times reporter recently. Now, he said, ''the harassment is tremendous. Every day I have to walk through picketers who call me a murderer.''
Dr. Boyd continues to perform abortions but an increasing number of physicians do not. Of 4,000 members polled by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists in 1985, for instance, only a third of the 84 percent who said abortions should be legal and available actually performed them, and the majority performed very few.
Though abortions are now legal, a woman who seeks one today may be forced to travel many miles from home, like generations of women before her when they were not. If a drug called RU 486 were available in the United States, however, that woman would be spared her journey and those doctors would be spared harassment. Abortion would be as private a decision as it should be, and the procedure, being non-surgical, considerably safer. Thanks to a noisy minority, however, that option is closed to American women - unless some pharmaceutical company is willing to brave the boos and threatened boycotts of anti-abortion activists.
Used in conjunction with prostaglandin, RU 486 is almost 100 percent effective when taken within 49 days of the patient's last menstrual period. It is also potentially useful for treating estrogen-fed breast cancers and endometriosis, a common cause of female infertililty. Its developer, Dr. Etienne-Emile Baulieu, received the prestigious Lasker Award for medical research last year. But it is licensed for sale only in France and China, primarily because of pressure from anti-abortion groups.
Getting RU 486 more widely distributed will take a humane, worldwide effort that would benefit from leadership by, and in, the United States.
Neither JoAnne Johnson, 19, nor Allison Atlas, 20, has very long to live - not unless they receive bone marrow transplants that might defeat their leukemia. But JoAnne is black and Allison is Jewish, which means they can't look to the National Marrow Donor Program's registry for help. Neither can most of the 9,000 Americans who might benefit from transplant surgery. They could, though, if Congress, having established the registry, did not leave it so poorly funded as to be almost useless.
Every person's bone marrow is of a particular type; the chance of finding a match between two unrelated people is 1 in 20,000, although it increases markedly if they are of the same population group. Because no systematic effort has been made to build and diversify the registry's listings, the chance that a member of a minority group can find a compatible donor listed there is close to infinitesimal. JoAnne and Allison are tragic proof.
Actually, the likelihood of any leukemia or aplastic anemia patient getting a new lease on life through the registry is pretty slim. Only about 70,000 people are registered now; it will take at least 250,000 to make the registry at all meaningful. But the program has only $100,000 a year for testing potential donors, which adds only 1,300 donors each year. At that rate, it will take 138 years for the registry to become truly useful.
JoAnne Johnson and Allison Atlas are unlucky on two counts: on having leukemia and in lacking compatible donors among their relatives. But they are lucky on a third: Both have families that have clamored long and loud on their behalf.
The Johnsons asked black people to volunteer, and in 10 days lined up 3,800 in the Washington area, where they live. But no match was found. Now they're bringing their campaign to Chicago. The Atlases, also from the Washington area, went to the Jewish community there and lined up 6,000 volunteers in six weeks. Again, no match. This week they're seeking help in New York. Both families have had to go into debt. They have paid for many of the potential donors' blood tests, at $75 each.
That thousands have been so quick to offer help is evidence of how willing many Americans are to trade a little discomfort for the sake of saving a life. The donor's bone marrow is withdrawn from the pelvis, under anesthesia; it replaces itself within days. But the burdened families of leukemia victims shouldn't have the further burden of begging the public to help.
Thousands have committed themselves to giving their bone marrow to this country's JoAnnes and Allisons. What the Federal Government needs to do is to fulfill the promise it has raised by creating the registry program. An increase of $4 million a year for testing donors would in short order make it work for everyone.
New York City has health problems. It festers with diseases caused by drugs and poverty; the AIDS epidemic rages. The New England Journal of Medicine reports that a black man in Harlem is less likely to live till the age of 65 than a man in Bangladesh. That makes all the more dismaying the delay in appointing a promising candidate for city health commissioner, Dr. Woodrow Myers.
Dr. Myers is Indiana's health commissioner. He came to national attention in 1986 when he fought Kokomo officials who tried to keep an AIDS-infected boy, Ryan White, out of school. He is highly regarded among his peers. ''Everything I know about him suggests he is a thoughtful, decent physician who cares a great deal about individual liberties and the rights of anyone with AIDS,'' says David Rogers, vice chairman of the National AIDS commission. ''The very groups that would most benefit are trying to shoot him down.''
The chief opposition to Dr. Myers comes from Act-Up, a gay activist group that believes his support for tracing the contacts of those infected with AIDS shows him to be punitive. Gay men at risk from AIDS have every right to be concerned that a health commissioner not follow coercive policies. But Act-Up's fears seem exaggerated. For one thing, Indiana is a conservative state. It would be naive to suppose that Dr. Myers's likely policies in New York can be inferred from his policies there. Contact tracing for AIDS may be inappropriate among gay men in large cities. It is a perfectly valid public health tool in other states. If Dr. Myers should be vetoed on these grounds, it will be hard to find anyone of standing to take the post.
Besides his professional qualifications, Dr. Myers is black. Given the health problems affecting black New Yorkers, that's another asset. AIDS is not the only problem a city health commissioner must face, and gay men are not its only victims. The African-American members of Mayor Dinkins's search panel continue to favor him while the gay members have turned against him. The dispute thus threatens to pit blacks against gay men.
Mr. Dinkins rashly said that he would not appoint a commissioner without the approval of Mathilde Krim, head of the search panel. It's time for him to take the decision back into his own hands. A commissioner who can reach out to minority communities, where the disease is spreading, could strongly advance public health. To turn down Dr. Myers because of the hypothetical fears of a vocal minority would be an error.
Dr. Veronica Prego's tragic dispute with New York City has been billed as a ''$175 million lawsuit.'' It's been that way ever since someone added up all the dollars in her original complaint that the city's negligence, in leaving a contaminated needle on a hospital bed, caused her to contract AIDS. As the legal world knows, such figures mean nothing. Plaintiffs can usually win damages whether or not amounts are specified in their civil complaints.
Such dollar demands do have theatrical value, however, so years ago, doctors and municipalities persuaded the New York Legislature to forbid specific dollar amounts in medical malpractice suits or suits against localities. On New York City's motion, those numbers have been stricken from Dr. Prego's amended complaint. Should she win her suit, the jury will be asked to calculate damages on a reasonable basis.
The law is a breeding ground for gross exaggerations. Lawyers sing, ''This case is going all the way to the Supreme Court'' even when they have no hope of getting there. ''Noriega faces 145 years,'' the news reports say, adding up the maximum penalties in all the counts against Panama's former leader. In his case, such melodrama is a harmless irrelevance. In Dr. Prego's poignant case, it is an offensive distraction.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
The American Heart Association is awarding its seal of approval to foods it deems beneficially low in cholesterol, salt and fat. The Food and Drug Administration, stung by the trespass on its turf, has told the association to desist. The unfitting shootout between these two custodians of public fitness at least draws attention to the deepening confusion over food health claims.
Health claims for food were forbidden until 1984. Then, as an experiment, the F.D.A. allowed Kellogg to assert on its All-Bran cereal that foods high in fiber may help prevent cancer. Food health claims have since proliferated, but the agency's experiment remains unfinished. It has delayed writing urgently needed rules to clarify what claims may be made and what degree of scientific consensus should support them.
Such issues aren't simple; the agency took 11 years just to define peanut butter. As to claims that particular foods may promote health, the agency is buffeted between consumer groups, which want claims strictly monitored, and the White House, which favors laissez-faire.
The delay is doubly unfortunate. Advertising has great power to mislead: a manufacturer could stuff an unhealthy food with vitamin A and claim it was good for the skin. But advertising can also convey valuable nutrition information, which consumers increasingly seek.
The Heart Association has marched into this regulatory paralysis with a plan to approve foods that test low in ingredients associated with heart disease. The association says its stiff annual fee -up to $640,000 per product - will simply cover testing costs. This is a valuable initiative. But it could produce unintended results. For example, the Heart Association has started by awarding its seal of approval to foods in categories like margarine, crackers and cooking oil, which are not particularly healthful. If consumers are enticed by the seal to eat more of these foods, even the better varieties, their diet will be worse. The Heart Association might have done better to award a seal of disapproval to fatty foods that promote heart disease.
Consumers need information related to total diet before they're buffeted with claims about particular foods. The association's heart is in the right place, but regulating the quality of the national diet is the job of the Food and Drug Administration, not private groups. The confusion over food claims hurts manufacturers, too. Investments promoting foods with oat bran may have suffered now that new studies dispute oat bran's value in reducing cholesterol.
It's a proper role of government to determine where consensus exists and then let food makers inform the public. The F.D.A. lacks the staff to clear claims in advance, let alone monitor unregistered claims. But it could approve model statements, like ''fiber may help reduce cancer,'' which manufacturers could use without challenge.
Congress is considering legislation to hurry the F.D.A. along. The oat bran imbroglio and the skirmish with the Heart Association attest to the liveliness of the experiment the agency started with All-Bran - and the urgency of completing it.
When to employ a quarantine, the isolation or detention of individuals determined to be an infectious danger to others, is not a new dilemma in public health -especially not in the city of Typhoid Mary. Yet the recent media hullabaloo and protest circus over Mayor David Dinkins's appointment of Woodrow Myers as New York City Health Commissioner badly confused this issue. This is especially true with respect to Dr. Myers's purported support of quarantining HIV-infected individuals who deliberately transmit the fatal virus to others.
In any epidemic, and AIDS is no exception, there are always two objectives: the care of the sick and the protection of the uninfected. We are doing a marvelous job of learning the former, but we have failed to grasp the nettles involved in the latter. AIDS is a formidable adversary that is quite likely, given enough time, to kill almost all the 200,000 New Yorkers currently infected with it.
Concern for the individual liberties of those currently infected must take second place to the protection of the uninfected and the larger community. This is not to say that the rights of those already infected are not important: we must always fight to achieve their reasonable maximum expression. But they are not absolute nor may they supersede the rights of noninfected people.
What every health commissioner knows is that his highest responsibility is to lay the facts of the protection of the public's health, as best he can determine them, before the community, and to argue forcefully for a public policy based squarely upon them. There are other checks and balances in the executive, legislative and judicial branches that decide the political and social trade-offs.
Often those realities are unpleasant, even offensive, to some in the community. But articulating them and attempting to see them through is what any public health officer worth his salt is paid to do.
David Axelrod, the New York State Health Commissioner, and I have strongly opposed quarantine legislation in New York because of our concern that categorical approaches to quarantine open the door to unwarranted repression of classes of people. Yet at the same time, we both have said that existing state and city health codes provide ample authority for the detention of any individual who is a clear and present danger to the health of others.
The last formal action I signed as Health Commissioner was an order for hospital detention of a woman with infectious tuberculosis. She had shown herself repeatedly unwilling to take her medication and render herself non-infectious. Of course, she had the option of contesting my detention order in court.
It is virtually certain that, at some point, a New York City health commissioner will be faced with an analogous situation concerning the transmission of the AIDS virus. When all lesser remedies have failed, can anyone doubt what would be the proper course of action for the commissioner to take, faced with, as apparently occurred in California, an infected individual who knowingly and repeatedly sold his blood for transfusion?
It is probable that we may have, perhaps sooner than many expect, a treatment that renders infected individuals less infectious. Would there not then be a clear obligation to take all reasonable measures to insure that the infected take their medication, thus protecting others?
If society wishes to restrict the power of public health officials, it could decide that such actions can only be taken with a prior court order. But there can be no doubt that the availability of these actions is necessary. While we must insure that they are taken wisely and fairly, we must never renounce their availability.
The issue, then, is not whether quarantine is a legitimate tool for protecting the public health. The issue is: Under what circumstances should it be employed, and with what safeguards against its abuse? Protesters, our new Mayor and every New Yorker must realize that this issue cannot be decided rationally by street demonstrations by one self-interested group, or by sloganeering in political generalities. It is best decided by a combination of professional expertise, mayoral leadership and court oversight, acting on a case-by-case basis.
Two years ago in Oregon, a boy named Adam Jacoby Howard was dying of leukemia. A bone marrow transplant might have helped but that would have cost $100,000 -money his family, on welfare, didn't have and money the state was not prepared to fork over. Earlier in the year the legislature had voted to stop organ transplants for welfare recipients and devote the funds to prenatal care instead. Adam, his family and friends were within $30,000 of the goal when he died.
With this story Daniel Callahan, a student of medical ethics, begins his new book, ''What Kind of Life,'' and it forces readers to face up to a dilemma society would rather evade. If money that might save the life of one person is the same money that is certain to insure a better start for 1,500 others, common sense says the Oregon legislature's decision was wise. Still, one thinks of Adam's relatives adding up their money to see if they're near $100,000. One thinks of Adam passing collection cans. Then common sense speaks with a cruel, inhuman voice. How to spend finite funds on what seems an infinity of ills is what ''What Kind of Life'' is about. How long can society afford to postpone the inevitable? One says ''society'' and not ''a person'' because, as the author points out, it is government that often pays for the extraordinary interventions that have become commonplace.
In a Harris Survey two years ago, 91 percent of the respondents agreed that ''everybody should have the right to get the best possible health care - as good as the treatment a millionaire gets.'' Another poll, however, by the Public Interest Foundation indicated that Americans won't put their money where their sentiments are. Would they support a Government program to cover catastrophic illness, even if it cost $10 billion a year? A strong majority said yes. Would they support a tax increase of about $125 a year to fund it? Some 90 percent said no.
Mr. Callahan speaks of society sometimes having to adjust its sights toward care, not cure. ''No matter how far we push the frontiers of medical progress we are always left with a ragged edge. . . . Whether it be intensive care for the premature newborn, low-birthweight baby, or bypass surgery for the very old, or AZT therapy for AIDS patients, the eventual outcome will not likely be good; and when, eventually, these problems are solved there will then be others to take their place.''
Because the costs of pushing on have become ''intolerably high,'' Mr. Callahan says health has to be perceived as a communal rather than an individual good. There must be central planning. Rules have to be made, categories established, cutoff points made clear. That means a lot less money for dialysis and transplants, say, and a lot more for education and preventive care.
But how to establish the notion of health as a communal good in a country that has, by virtue of public programs and private insurance, made longevity as much a right as the vote? Mr. Callahan doesn't have an answer yet. Nor can he tell us how to quiet the most nagging of all terrors. ''Timor Mortis conturbat me'' is the famous refrain of a 16th-century English poem: fear of death troubles me. Costs and benefits must be weighed, but for most of us, the refrain reverberates.
From the beginning of the AIDS epidemic, John Cardinal O'Connor and the Catholic Archdiocese of New York have led in selfless caring for the victims. But AIDS activists are now demanding that public funds be withheld from the nursing home care the archdiocese proposes to give. They argue the church's care may be ''judgmental'' and that it refuses to give instruction in preventive measures like the use of condoms. How can this ugly dispute be resolved?
The archdiocese plans to provide shelter and long-term care for people actively afflicted with AIDS but who do not require the kind of intensive care given in skilled nursing facilities. The city badly needs such beds.
Cardinal O'Connor, following church teaching, has condemned instruction in contraception and insisted on abstinence as the only sure AIDS prevention strategy. And he insists that archdiocesan health care facilities adhere to that teaching as a matter of ''institutional conscience.''
As a matter of public health, this position is regrettable; greater use of condoms is one of the few preventive measures available to help stem the epidemic. But it would be unreasonable to expect the church to teach otherwise in its own institutions and programs.
The issue, then, is whether the care the church affords to AIDS victims outweighs its silence on preventive measures other than abstinence. The church's succor to the sick is real, and needed. To deride its care as judgmental is an irrelevant assault on its doctrine. But it is more than a theoretical possibility that those in its care may infect others if they don't use condoms.
Officials of the archdiocese's Terence Cardinal Cooke Health Center have gone far in offering compromises. They emphasize that patients remain free, with no threat of discrimination, to look elsewhere for services that the Catholic institutions do not provide. The state also is free to fill gaps that it considers critical.
AIDS victims are grateful for the church's helping hand; let others think hard before staying it.
The Federal Government felt moved this Lenten week to get up in the pulpit and urge its flock to discipline their diets. It admonished every citizen above 2 years of age to eat less fat and more spinach. The sermon is probably salubrious, but the sanctimony can be taken with a modicum of salt.
Americans eat a rich diet, one that is probably laden with much more fat than is good for longevity. Methuselah, it can safely be held, was no couch potato. General prescriptions like ''don't smoke,'' ''take regular moderate exercise'' and ''eat less fat'' are almost certainly good sense. It's harder to say as much for the more specific dietary advice that peppers the eater. Fads are to the diet book publishing industry what fashion is to the rag trade: a means to promote consumer expenditure.
Reflect upon the swift rise and fall of oats and olive oil. Oats, it turned out last month, are no better than any other grain in reducing a person's cholesterol level. Olive oil has now also slipped from its repute as a cholesterol reducer. Given the apparently unstable state of nutritional science, what tale can a harried consumer swallow?
A group that has little doubt of its own wisdom is the National Cholesterol Education Program, the public voice of the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. One of its committees now says that people should take less than 30 percent of total calories from fat, and less than 10 percent from saturated fatty acids.
These are moderate recommendations, and far more likely to be right than wrong. Yet as Gina Kolata reports in The Times, a strong minority of critics feels they go beyond what is scientifically proved. Both epidemiology and animal experiments show that the more cholesterol carried in the bloodstream, the greater the likelihood of dying from heart disease. It's a persuasive conjecture that lowering cholesterol will reduce heart disease. But conjecture is not proof.
Elaborate clinical trials have been set up to test this idea, by giving patients low-fat diets or drugs that lower cholesterol. The benefits have been much less significant than expected. Although many cardiologists consider that the results still make a substantial case against cholesterol, others find the outcome prodigiously disappointing. It's even less certain that the results can be extended from middle-aged men, the usual subjects of these studies, to the young and old.
Dr. Richard Carleton, the chairman of the cholesterol panel, argues that 38 different professional organizations endorse his panel's conclusions. Their message, he says, is: ''Let's not confuse. Let's coalesce. Let's speak with the same voice.''
But that's not how science works. Eminent authorities can err en masse, especially when they coalesce and suppress confusion. The premature release of the Salk polio vaccine is just one example close to home. The cholesterol panel may be right, but its methods are those of puffery, not science.
In listening to dietary advisers, there is one good policy: Eschew fats, fads and excessive certainty.
''I hear America singing,'' wrote Walt Whitman in the last century. Today, he would have difficulty hearing himself think. According to audiologists, 20 million Americans are exposed daily to persistent noise loud enough to cause hearing loss. The racket also contributes to high blood pressure, peptic ulcers, aggression, poor reading, lack of consideration and, understandably, the urge to give up.
The clamor is not likely to diminish. Of the more than 1,100 state and local anti-noise programs that existed in the 1970's, 15 remain; the Federal Government abandoned its noise abatement effort in 1982.
Of course, little of this is news to New Yorkers. They need no audiologists to tell them the din from emergency vehicles, subways, auto burglar alarms, boom boxes, garbage trucks, three airports and millions of horn-happy drivers is exceedingly painful. Most frustrating of all, the New Yorker's usual method for solving all problems can't help. Screaming would only make things worse.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
In the annals of medicine, cures for diseases have come through one person's inspiration or years of research by teams of scientists.
But never have researchers, working alone or together, had to struggle against some of the conditions that surround much of the AIDS work in this country: hate, bigotry, vendetta, rage and contempt.
The five uglinesses that enmesh AIDS work took root almost from the moment the AIDS epidemic was discovered in this country less than a decade ago. Now it is taking a new form - vilification of those who say heterosexual transmission of AIDS is a growing danger in the world.
In the beginning fear was the soil for the anger and the fury. AIDS came so quickly, struck so hard and was so deadly. Who would not be afraid? But fear was nourished by prejudice against those who were seen then to be the only sufferers from the disease and its carriers -male homosexuals.
Brand them, put them in concentration camps. Rarely heard anymore -but remaining in the memory.
Then it developed that the disease was being spread widely through infected needles used by drug addicts, as well as through homosexual intercourse.
Walls began to go up in the mind. These were poor addicts, usually black. All anybody else had to do to be safe was avoid people like that. Just live elsewhere, have more money.
The particularly callous used the connection between AIDS and drugs as a reason for legalizing drugs. Needles would be cleaner!
Even when AIDS babies began filling special wards in city hospitals, even when it was discovered that the blood-donor pipeline had been contaminated, most Americans felt safe behind their walls.
Then, slowly, not so safe. The realization began to take hold that heterosexual transmission of AIDS was not a possibility, but was right here with us.
The evidence seemed to be that drug addiction or contact with infected homosexuals or bisexuals could usually be tracked down. But sometimes, here and in Africa, there was no such track.
The scientific community argues about the extent of the danger of heterosexual transmission in the United States. That is right and inevitable. AIDS figures have to be revised constantly, up or down, as more information comes in about this new disease that has such a long, undetectable incubation period.
In any case, with more American women getting AIDS through their own addiction or through sex with needle users - and with heterosexual transmission already a devastating plague in Africa - it was sensible to send out warnings.
The issue has plain political and economic significance. If increased heterosexual transmission is seen as a possibility, many people who never thought of AIDS as being part of their own world would push for more research and hospitalization money.
Altogether an important, still developing issue to be researched and discussed seriously. But what is happening is that those AIDS specialists who are worried about the spread of heterosexual transmission are being attacked anonymously by some of their colleagues and publicly by some journalists as if they were despicable, fund-grubbing criminals.
The latest outbreak comes in a book, ''The Myth of Heterosexual AIDS,'' by Michael Fumento. It is interesting principally because it shows how a writer can turn an important subject into a display of petulance and vendetta that sadly diminishes the value of his own considerable work and inquiry.
Coincidentally, Dr. Jonathan Mann, the American who heads the AIDS work of the World Health Organization and has warned about the spread of heterosexual AIDS, resigned Friday because of undisclosed differences with the head of the organization.
That is a loss to the work of W.H.O. The scientific community hopes and expects him to stay in the struggle against AIDS.
But chances are that all of us are already paying a price for vendettas targeting those who work against AIDS.
Researchers, clinicians and science writers are human. So some - this has no reference to Dr. Mann - are beginning to avoid a hard and sometimes dangerous field where one of the rewards is likely to be endless calumny.
Still, the fact is that all the nastiness may snarl and slow AIDS research but it has not destroyed it.
That is a small miracle. It is also a large testimony to those who say they will be damned if they give up work against AIDS - love them or not. It is what they want to do with their lives.
ON MY MIND
The surge of deaths among patients taking an experimental new AIDS drug, DDI, does not necessarily mean the drug is to blame. AIDS activists have brought about changes in the traditional methods of testing drugs. The new methods represent a compassionate response to AIDS sufferers. They also risk confusion.
Patients with a deadly disease often clamor for experimental drugs that are not yet fully tested. But four out of five new drugs flunk the Food and Drug Administration's tests because they turn out to be toxic or ineffective or both. Drug regulators therefore figure that it's better to complete the rigorous F.D.A. testing, even though that may take years, than to allow desperate patients to poison themselves with untested chemicals.
AIDS has changed that calculus. The sufferers are educated and articulate, their spokesmen sometimes aggressive. They say they can't wait for promising new drugs to complete the full rigor of F.D.A. testing. And they argue that patients, not physicians or regulators, should decide whether the risks are worth taking.
These arguments are hard to resist. Even though the F.D.A. approved the first AIDS drug, AZT, in a record 22 months, the follow-up drug DDI has been made widely available in a system known as parallel track, even before the clinical trials are complete. But last week the drug's manufacturer reported that the death rate among the parallel track patients had been more than 10 times the rate among patients in the clinical trials.
This has created confusion and alarm. Patients on DDI are besieging their doctors to ask if they should carry on with the drug. Very likely the extra deaths are caused by the disease, not the drug, since the patients on parallel track are sicker. But there is no way to be sure.
A more serious danger, critics say, is that parallel track testing may impede recruitment of patients to the clinical trials. That's because trial patients have a 50 percent chance of receiving an alternative method of treatment, whereas patients in the parallel track are assured of receiving DDI.
Some 8,000 patients are being treated with DDI in the parallel track, but only 700 of the 1,500 needed for the clinical trials have signed up for them. Organizers say there is no proof the parallel track has delayed recruitment, but others fear it has. All agree that the longer it takes to get clear results from the trials, the worse for all patients.
Expanding access to DDI brings hope to critically ill patients, and will do them good if the drug proves safe and effective. But the parallel track should not be allowed to cause significant delay to clinical trials. And in the future, even parallel track patients could be asked to volunteer for a simple trial, like receiving different doses of the drug. At present, absent any point of comparison, the data from these patients are uninterpretable.
Parallel track is a compassionate experiment. But failure to keep it under close control could merely impede the already complex task of deciding what drugs are safe and effective. That's in no one's interest, least of all those suffering from AIDS.
America's tattered health insurance system cries out for reform. Congress turned for guidance to a bipartisan commission that now offers some useful ideas. But it evades the central issue. The commission boldly proposes an $86 billion-a-year plan to provide universal health insurance. But it doesn't say where the Federal share, $66 billion, would come from.
Worse, it doesn't say how to keep medical costs from continuing to skyrocket. Ducking the question of which taxes to raise is forgivable. Ducking how to contain the ruinous inflation of medical costs is not.
Millions of Americans, unable to afford basic medical insurance, are terrorized by the prospect of costly illness. Even people of means face bankruptcy should they need long-term nursing care. That's why in 1988 Congress created the 15-member commission, named in honor of the late Representative Claude Pepper and headed by Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th, to propose reform.
The commission has now released a set of recommendations, notably to extend health insurance, including coverage for long-term nursing care. Under the plan, large employers would offer affordable basic insurance to employees or else pay into a public health plan. The public insurance would cover people otherwise uninsured, with subsidized rates for the poor.
In general, these ideas are sound. Rather than creating a Federal behemoth, the commission would graft universal coverage onto the existing structure of employer-based insurance. But successful reform of medical insurance requires more than general outlines.
Medical costs are soaring in large part because the nation relies on fee-for-service plans, under which patients pick their own doctors and receive insurance reimbursement for most costs. Doctors, hospitals and patients don't much care how much treatment costs because an insurance company winds up paying most of the bill. The system encourages unnecessary tests and exotic procedures.
To control costs, the commission calls for modest deductibles and co-insurance. But health finance experts - most notably Alain Enthoven of Stanford University - have shown that deductibles and co-insurance are an insufficient brake. Among the many reforms they recommend, two are essential:
Consumers must be made aware of costs. This requires limiting tax deductions for health insurance premiums to a fixed amount, enough for adequate coverage. A consumer would be free to buy a more expensive plan, but at his own expense, not that of the taxpayer.
This one change would make consumers sensitive to costs and open up the market to fierce competition from Health Maintenance Organizations and other alternatives to fee-for-service plans.
Health insurance must be ''managed.'' Individuals lack the expertise or time to shop intelligently for medical insurance. Professor Enthoven would rely upon corporate sponsors - or a public sponsor for those without employer-based coverage - to formulate options and monitor quality.
By ignoring details like tax subsidies and managed care, the Pepper Commission renders many of its recommendations unenforceable. For example, the commission would require that private insurers enroll the sick as well as the healthy. But without careful scrutiny by knowledgeable corporate sponsors, this provision would be easily evaded.
Congress had the right to expect its commission, after a year of study, to face up to the complexities of health insurance. Instead, Congress got a wish list that skirts the central problem of cost control. America has lost a year.
''Most of the things that are likely to help solve the long-term care problem are being tried in some pilot project somewhere, but we're really still at the very beginning.'' So said Dr. Burton Reifler of Winston-Salem, N.C., the operator of a pilot project, in the four-part New York Times series on long-term care that concludes today.
Dr. Reifler is half right. Much is being tried. But the nation is not really at the beginning. For better or worse, America already possesses a publicly funded system of long-term care called Medicaid. But it is a deeply flawed system. The challenge is to replace it with something more efficient and humane.
The long-term care problem, already daunting, will become more so as the elderly population increases. The number of elderly Americans needing some type of help is projected to grow from 6.5 million in 1987 to 19 million in 2040.
By far the preferred type of help is home care. Most elderly people want to stay in their own homes and communities, among family and friends. There is a growing need for publicly funded assistance to provide, for instance, home-care attendants and respite care to give family care-givers time off. Yet Medicaid tilts heavily toward skilled nursing care. Less than 3 percent of the $15 billion in Federal Medicaid expenditures this year will go to home care. The reason is that long-term care has been mistakenly conceived as a medical, rather than a social problem.
At the same time, Medicaid, the health insurance program administered jointly by Washington and the states, is available only to the poor. Middle-class patients must first ''spend down'' most of their assets. This forced poverty is the source of wide, understandable anguish.
A Federal commission named for the late Representative Claude Pepper recently offered proposals for reform. These carry a daunting $43 billion price tag and neglect the crucial issue of cost controls. But they would right the balance in favor of home care. In addition, the Pepper commission called for a social insurance guarantee to cover the first three months of nursing home care and fully protect income and assets. Those who recover -and at least half do so - could easily return home.
A third proposal covers long-term nursing home care. Those who use this benefit would have to begin spending down, but the allowances would be far more generous than Medicaid now sets.
As the Times series made clear, the long-term care debate will engage difficult issues of fairness, equity and political feasibility. While answers remain to be found, at least the questions are starting to reverberate.
When I was a boy in my teens, I spent several months in a New York City hospital as a charity case.
That's what patients without money were called. The first time I saw those words on a hospital record, I felt unhappy and unworthy but not angry.
No money meant no insurance, no government help, no euphemism, no right to gentleness. We understood that.
About 50 men were in my ward. We lived in the smell and sound of illness, the miasma of illness, day and night.
Only when a patient was dying did he receive the grace of privacy. A portable screen was placed around his bed. When we heard the screech of the wheels coming down the corridor outside the ward, we knew it was the sound of death approaching.
Being poor did not mean being stupid. We knew the experienced physicians and surgeons who were supposed to attend us as part of their charitable duties in the hospital would show up about every two weeks and would not really remember us when we stared up from our beds.
Our bodies were in the care of doctors who had not finished their training. Some were discourteous and callous to us. Perhaps they knew charity cases did not complain, but we hated them and remember their faces.
But all the time, I knew one day things would get better in the hospitals. I knew someday everybody, poor people definitely included, would get better treatment, fine treatment.
I knew that was the way America was. It moved forward. In time there would be kindness and care for all. That is what we all believed, people of my generation in the wards.
But now, almost a lifetime later, when I visit the hospitals of my city I see things have become worse, not better, for the poor and for the middle class, too.
At least in my time, there were enough blessed nurses to help us. Now patients can call and call and ring and ring and nobody appears because 5,400 nursing positions are vacant.
Don't complain. We are paying the price for failing to give nurses the respect of sufficient salary and safe hospitals and safe streets around them.
The hospital in which I lay was in a rough neighborhood. But no drug addicts mugged the nurses as they left or prowled around the corners of the hospital itself.
And in my time at least if a person was suddenly taken seriously ill or was hurt in an accident, the emergency rooms of the city were immediately available. Now, unless he is dying, a patient can wait for hours in an emergency room, even a day, sometimes with only a chair in which to rest.
In my time at least you could count on getting into the hospital wards or rooms quickly. Now you can wait for weeks - not always but often enough so people forget that a decent society would consider quick hospital care a right not a privilege.
My desk is awash with reports from hospital specialists on how the great voluntary hospitals and the public hospital system of my city have to hunt ceaselessly for money, beds and medical personnel. I am grateful to the men and women who write the reports. Most of us think about hospitals only when we are in pain and fear.
One report blames the state for eliminating too many beds when it seemed the demand for beds would fall off - and for not adding beds when the demand suddenly rose.
Drug addiction, AIDS, teen-age pregnancy are blamed in other reports, sometimes almost as if they were annoyances rather than emergencies that this country should meet without histrionics.
But it seems to me that with hospitals, as with drugs, AIDS and public safety, we are going at it the wrong way around.
Our politicians figure out the minimum amount of money the voters would be willing to pay and then see what we can buy for it.
That condemns us to scraping along, spending billions, but without ever being able to set or meet goals. I long for the governor or the President who will at least try to do it the other way around - as the U.S. did with the space program.
He will tell us what doing a decent job with the hospitals, the drug problem, AIDS and public safety will cost over a period of 10 years and then say, ''Look, if you want to live healthy and safe, this is what it will cost; we can do it.''
When I was in the ward, that was the kind of thing I figured would happen one day. I just never dreamed that America itself would whine the years away telling the world that this golden land is just one more charity case.
ON MY MIND
The ugly, continuing battle over New York State's overdue new budget is not the only reason to despair about the State Senate. Its truculence on taxes is matched by its indifference to the suffering of terminally ill patients.
All too often the ill are in no condition to know or say, ''Turn off the respirator and let me die in peace.'' But there's a way the Legislature could give them back their voices: by passing a health care proxy bill.
In 1987 a state Task Force on Life and the Law proposed that patients be given the right to designate an agent to make life-and-death decisions should they be unable to do, involving respirators and other such forms of care. Three years later, 26 states have passed analogous laws; not New York.
An Assembly bill with strong bipartisan support never came to a vote last year because the Senate made clear it would not act. Now the bill has been reintroduced in the Assembly with 62 sponsors. It would permit competent adults to fill out a form giving a designated person the authority to make health care decisions for them once incompetence is certified by a physician. The form must be witnessed by two people, neither of whom can be the designated agent or the patient's doctor.
The agent's decisions then must be followed as if they were the patient's, unless the patient limits the agent's authority. And while both agent and physician would be protected from legal liability, the latter may challenge the former's decision in court. The proxies can be revoked at any time. Aside from one member who said last June that when God wanted someone He was the one who should pull the plug, the Senate has offered little in the way of views on the legislation. The only organized opposition comes from the Right to Life Party, which is absolutist in its dislike for any such legislation.
Whether to employ a health care proxy form would be up to the individual; there's nothing mandatory about it. Neither is it mandatory that the New York Senate act on this subject; only wise, only humane, only necessary.
There may be no more effective way to contain heroin abuse than methadone, a drug that blocks an addict's craving. Yet new efforts to expand use of methadone have inspired new attacks on it, attacks that defy common sense.
Methadone has been used successfully to treat heroin addicts since the 1960's. Over all, the therapy frees three of every four patients from heroin, giving them a chance at productive, stable lives. For those remaining in treatment more than five years, the success rate exceeds 90 percent.
AIDS enhances the importance of methadone: sharing of needles to inject heroin transmits the deadly disease. Methadone, taken orally, involves no such risk. Most important, methadone, cheap to produce and administer through clinics, is the only drug treatment now feasible in large volume.
It costs only $2,700 a year to maintain a heroin addict on methadone; a typical program of residential drug treatment costs five times as much. In New York City, home to half of America's half-million heroin addicts, 35,000 are on methadone, more than twice the number in residential programs.
Methadone has always had critics. Some, like Representative Charles Rangel, who heads the House narcotics committee, dislike the idea of continued dependency even on a benign substitute drug. He and others also worry about ''diversion'' - leakage of methadone to the black market. In response, Washington insists that methadone clinics include large numbers of counselors and other staff. The costs limit the number the clinics may serve, and many now turn addicts away.
Hoping to ease that problem, New York's Beth Israel Hospital in 1987 opened an experimental ''no frills'' clinic where addicts awaiting enrollment are started on methadone without expensive support, then moved into full programs as places open up. Evidence shows that the experiment has freed many addicts from heroin while reducing the cost by nearly $1,000 per patient per year. The Food and Drug Administration now must decide whether to authorize such interim clinics everywhere.
Mr. Rangel objects. At recent hearings, he summoned drug enforcement agents to testify about diversion and released a negative General Accounting Office study of 24 methadone clinics. His criticisms, however, don't hold up.
Drug agents found some methadone on the street but gave no reason to believe that more than a relative handful of patients sell their doses. The G.A.O. found that some clinics are poorly run and questioned the need for the interim approach, pointing out that some clinics do not have waiting lists.
Given a heroin addict population more than 10 times the capacity of methadone programs, the fact that some clinics lack waiting lists reflects poor outreach, not oversupply. Figures in the report, meanwhile, confirm that methadone works. The worst program examined by the G.A.O. succeeded in freeing 53 percent of patients from heroin; for 10 clinics, the rate was more than 90 percent.
With Federal drug officials now predicting a new invasion of heroin from growers overseas, the need for more methadone programs is urgent. Mr. Rangel insists instead on expanding ''comprehensive'' drug treatment. But ''comprehensive'' means expensive, while methadone means extensive. Turning away addicts who could be helped with methadone abuses them and their communities.
A Bette Davis fan who had longed to see ''The Great Lie'' found it recently in a video store. She thought she was renting a romantic drama; what she got was a horror movie. Every time Sandra Novak, the hard-as-nails concert pianist played by Mary Astor, pulled out another cigarette, the fan shrank. When Sandra drank her nightly brandy, the fan shuddered. When Maggie, the good-as-gold horse fancier played by B. D., rebuked her for wanting a ham and cheese sandwich, the fan shivered.
Maggie had her eye on the wrong stuff. Chain-smoking, brandy-slugging Sandra was pregnant. ''Forget about the ham and cheese, Maggie,'' the fan wanted to shout. ''Close out the Courvoisier! Banish the Camels!'' Sandra's baby was born fat and healthy, which is a miracle. If her smoking, swigging ways reflect pregnancy circa 1941, when the film was made, then the apparent good health of many a middle-aged American is a bit of a miracle, too.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
It is crowded in the kitchen. In a corner the baby leans back in her walker, gumming a biscuit. In another a toddler is eating Alphabits. A teen-age boy, a skyscraper to the little ones, passes through with that sullen silence teen-age boys own. A teen-age girl, her hair a corn-colored tail down her back, scoops ice cream at the counter.
The mother of them all sits at the table, getting through the day on tea and cigarettes. The only one of her children missing is the middle one, the 4-year-old, Melissa, nicknamed Sassy, known to the world as Baby M. ''I got the celebrity status without having a celebrity life,'' said Mary Beth Whitehead-Gould.
It's hard to believe, in this pretty, child-choked house on Long Island, that this woman blew her life to bits for the sake of another kid in the kitchen. The teen-agers, Tuesday and Ryan, are Mary Beth's children by her first marriage. Austin and Morgan, the little ones, are the children of Dean Gould, whom she married three years ago.
And Sassy is the child of contract. Mary Beth was inseminated in an arrangement with Bill Stern, a biochemist who was to pay $10,000 when she turned the baby over to him and his doctor wife. When she decided it was unnatural to do so, one of the nastiest custody battles of the century began. ''It's a typical divorce,'' she said. ''I have the kind of visitation fathers have - some weekends and a couple of weeks in summer.''
Her credit cards say simply ''Mary Gould,'' but she is recognized everywhere. Sometimes when she is out with Morgan, who is 9 months old, people will whisper, ''That's Baby M.''
''They've frozen her in time,'' her mother says of Melissa. ''To the public she'll always be a baby.''
Public opinion is like that. We make up our minds and freeze the judgment, a leaf in the ice of the pond. There's no need to give it a second thought, except that those involved have to live with our first ones. ''People are afraid of me,'' says the woman adjudged unstable by experts for pathology ranging from inadequate pattycake to dyed hair. ''I have to live with this reputation as an absolute wacko.'' This seems histrionic - one diagnosis at the trial - until three of my friends ask the same question: Is she nuts?
Well, she uses a lot of Windex and she seems a little obsessed with floral wallpaper, but her sanity is clear. Public opinion is sometimes wacko, too. While feminists were insisting that surrogacy was the exploitation of poor women by rich ones, I saw Mary Beth Whitehead as the have, and the Sterns as the have nots. She had kids; they didn't. I sided with the Sterns.
I was wrong. I figured that out after reading Mrs. Gould's surprisingly eloquent book about the whole mess, and after reading the New Jersey Supreme Court's predictably eloquent decision. In one sentence it became clear: ''We do not know of, and cannot conceive of, any other case where a perfectly fit mother was expected to surrender her newly born infant, perhaps forever, and was then told she was a bad mother because she did not.''
Mary Beth is bound by court order not to talk about Melissa. But you can tell that the polarization of class and attitude so evident in the courtroom continues, though the rancor has subsided. In one household Sassy is the middle of five children whose 33-year-old mother does not work; in another she is the only child of two professionals approaching middle age. Fruit Loops and cartoons in one place, raisins and the ballet in another. ''Maybe it's the best of both worlds,'' says her mother, sounding unconvinced.
This is how public opinion works: People come to stand for something, and a part of their humanity is forfeited in the process. Movie stars complain about this, but at least they get a house with a pool in the bargain, celebrity status and the celebrity life. The ordinary folks who do extraordinary things face something more daunting. Norma McCorvey stood for legal abortion but had to have her baby because Roe v. Wade came too late. Karen Ann Quinlan's parents tended her for years after the respirator was removed, years after she became the symbol of the right to die.
And Mary Beth Whitehead has her daughter some weekends. Together they embody the false promise of surrogacy. ''There's a piece of me that wishes it never happened,'' she says. ''My children may meet people they'll want to marry and they won't be accepted because of who I am.''
It would be good for everyone in the business of passing judgment, and those who do it as a hobby at the dinner table, to see her as she says this, staring out into a backyard full of toys, wondering whether her children will have to give up someone they love because once, in the white glare of the world court, their mother refused to do the same. ''Time heals,'' she said. Scars stay.
PUBLIC & PRIVATE
''Deinstitutionalization'' - removing mental patients from big state hospitals for more humane treatment in communities - has become a textbook example of failed social policy. Yet Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York and the State Legislature now behave as if it never happened. If allowed to prevail, their denial of a disastrous history will inflict new suffering on thousands of mental patients and the communities they inhabit.
Back in the 1960's, state mental hospitals held more than 80,000 patients; overcrowding and other abuses led reformers to call for their release to community programs. During the 1970's, hospital populations fell below 20,000.
But if the state succeeded in pushing patients out, it failed miserably at providing community care. Upstate towns dependent on hospitals, and unions of hospital workers, pressured lawmakers to keep the hospitals open and heavily staffed. That limited money for communities.
Many discharged patients, and thousands of new ones whom hospitals refused to take in, migrated to New York City and its suburbs. For a time they found shelter in cheap hotels. When the 1980's real estate markets eliminated many of them, the patients wound up on the street. As the mentally ill homeless have become more visible, state officials have finally begun to respond with more support for community programs, residences and caseworkers. But that effort is in trouble. To save $43 million, Albany would resume deinstitutionalization in a big way.
Proposed cuts would reduce the current state hospital capacity of 15,599 to about 14,000. But none of the savings would go to communities. Instead, state support would also shrink for community residences and psychiatric emergency rooms. Hundreds of community mental health staff jobs would be wiped out, including 200 in a highly successful program of intensive case work.
Reducing both state hospital beds and community programs virtually guarantees thousands more homeless mental patients on the streets. In New York City alone, the cutbacks would leave at least 5,000 without help.
As the state faces a $1.5 billion budget gap, the Governor and legislative leaders are right to insist that all agencies accept a fair share of pain. But the mental health cutbacks cross an unacceptable line: For the sake of savings that might be made up with a modest tax or other cuts, they would exact a huge price in terms of official decency and public morale.
The setting: Manhattan's wealthy Upper East Side. The time: a cold, rainy afternoon in late March. The characters: a young woman from the Visiting Nurse Service of New York and three patients, for whom she represents the difference between living at home and living in a home for the aged.
The first is a bachelor of 64 who lives in a basement room furnished with two cots, a television set, two folding chairs, a table, an old refrigerator and a hotplate. His closet is a metal pole that bisects the room, and the toilet, sink and tub are down the hall Once a tailor, he has been robbed of half a foot and most of his sight by diabetes. Still, he gets to Chinatown once a week to buy noodles (he is Chinese); makes carrot soup every night because he has profound faith in that vegetable's effect on vision; and is pained if a visitor doesn't take the chair he proffers.
When the man gets mail, he gets nervous because it is always official business and it always involves money. His $250 rent takes most of his Social Security; he tries to ration his medical care because he fears that if the city finds him too big a burden it will take his Medicaid away. Dressing his foot is only part of the nurse's task: reassuring him is another.
The second is a widow of 93 who lives in an apartment that in younger, more affluent hands might shine. But she is very old and very poor so the walls need painting, the furniture needs slipcovering and her bed petticoat, once a proud pink, is faded and needs mending. She was raised in Boston and her voice has a Brahmin's dry precision.
'' 'Alone' was all I had to write when I filled out the census form,'' she says. ''Alone. Alone. Alone.''
She is eligible for Medicaid, but she won't accept what she perceives as charity, even though it would mean having two 12-hour aides a day. ''Don't even speak of it,'' she snaps when the nurse urges her to enroll. The third person, also a widow, is 77 and lives in two rooms that she never leaves because, half-blind and child-sized, she knows she's a mugger's dream. But what a life this former nanny had, she says, taking care of the most wonderful children. A big stroke, followed by three small ones, wiped out her savings.
''I get Social Security on account of my husband,'' she says. ''And I'm so grateful. But now I'm getting something called S.S.I., and my friend in the building says it's welfare. Oh, I was sick when I heard that. Is it welfare?'' she asks the nurse, who is filling a week's worth of insulin syringes. Her eyes plead for a ''No.'' The nurse explains. ''S.S.I. means Supplemental Security Income, and it's not welfare.''
None of these three belong in a nursing home, not even the 93-year-old, who might die more quickly of despair than of disease if she were institutionalized. But it's past imagining where they'd be if not for agencies like the Visiting Nurse Service, Meals on Wheels, modest rent subsidies and the help of Medicare homeworkers.
They have no families and their best friend is New York City, which, while a tough place to live, is historically generous to its sick and indigent elderly. These three can get more services here than anywhere else. Enabling them to stay at home is probably cheaper than institutionalizing them. The two widows' rent subsidies (through the city's Senior Citizens Rent Increase Exemption) add up to no more than $2,400 a year each. Homeworkers' wages are modest and given these people's poverty, Medicaid would be picking up their doctors' bills anyway.
They are, of course, lonely. But as anyone who's ever been in a nursing home knows, there's little companionship to be found in most of them. Under their own roofs, they have their own things, their own space. The basement in which the Chinese tailor lives is a misery, but at least it's home.
When some 50,000 Haitian-Americans marched in protest across the Brooklyn Bridge recently, their complaint was arcane - the Government won't accept their blood. But it's a deeply felt issue. It pits their understandable fear of being stigmatized against a slight extra chance of contaminating the blood supply with the AIDS virus.
Letting Haitians donate blood might expose at most 36 patients a year to the AIDS virus, according to the Food and Drug Administration, which regulates blood collection. An F.D.A. advisory panel has voted to stop excluding Haitians, proposing extra safeguards to counter the risk.
That's fine in theory. But if the safeguards prove impractical - and they might - the F.D.A. will have little choice but to insist on maintaining the policy of exclusion. Any extra risk to the blood supply is unacceptable.
Two lines of defense keep blood banks virtually free of the AIDS virus. High-risk groups like gay men and drug users are asked not to donate, and all blood is tested for antibodies to the AIDS virus. But the test is at best 99.9 percent accurate, so 0.1 percent of tainted donations could elude detection. And the human body can take six weeks or more after infection to create enough antibodies for the test to spot. Any blood donated in this period carries the AIDS virus, even if in undetectable amounts.
These are two good reasons to exclude groups at higher than usual risk, like people from Haiti and sub-Saharan African countries, which have a high incidence of AIDS. Another reason is that AIDS in these countries, and among Haitians in the U.S., is spread mostly by heterosexual intercourse.
Heterosexual spread in this country otherwise remains very low, which is why the present blood donor questionnaire does not probe for heterosexual risk factors like venereal disease. Instead, the present Federal policy is to exclude Haitian-Americans altogether.
At first, only Haitians who arrived in the U.S. after 1977 were excluded. But in February the F.D.A. extended the ban to all Haitians, prompting even further resentment. Haitian-Americans say the policy incites discrimination. They demand that donors be screened on the basis of risky behavior, not country of origin.
Last week the F.D.A. panel voted 3 to 2 to drop the exclusion policy. As an alternative it proposes expanding the questionnaire to cover heterosexual risk and asking all new donors first to be tested for the AIDS virus. F.D.A. officials say they plan to follow this advice.
Both steps would in theory reduce risk, so why not take them anyway? Because heterosexual spread of AIDS in the U.S. remains so small, and the blood supply is extremely safe. The new procedures would be costly and would probably discourage many healthy blood donors. Some blood centers also fear that pretesting would attract people at high risk who just want to know if they are infected, exactly the group that blood centers wish to avoid.
The New York Blood Center wants to drop the exclusion because it fears that sympathy boycotts on campuses may reduce collections. But so may the new procedures.
The F.D.A. needs to think more carefully before accepting its committee's advice. Preventing discrimination is a high priority. Keeping the blood supply free of a deadly disease and insuring adequate supplies surely rank even higher.
Gov. Tommy Thompson of Wisconsin has approved a temporary ban on bovine growth hormone, a synthetic chemical that makes cows produce a lot more milk. Wisconsin deserves better. Its Governor has acted on the basis of fear and misinformation.
The hormone, made in bacteria by the new techniques of genetic engineering, has two adversaries: the Foundation for Economic Trends, which opposes genetic engineering in general, and small farmers who fear the new technique will benefit large farmers and force them out of business.
The foundation argues that the hormone ''may harm dairy cows and there are questions of safety to humans.'' Given public sensitivity to strange hormones in their milk, the safety argument has powerful resonance. It is wholly erroneous and Governor Thompson should be ashamed of swallowing it, for three reasons. The synthetic hormone injected into cows is almost identical to the cow's natural hormone, small amounts of which occur in milk anyway. Even if the milk of treated cows has slightly more growth hormone, the hormone is a protein that's destroyed in the human digestive tract. Even if bovine growth hormone, real or synthetic, should somehow enter the human bloodstream, it differs so greatly from human growth hormone as to have no biological effect.
On present evidence, the Food and Drug Administration says it ''has no reasons for human safety concerns'' from the meat and milk of cows treated with growth hormone. That leaves its effect on dairy farmers. No one should be unsympathetic to the hardship of farmers forced out of business. But the answer, as with any other industry, has to lie in a better social safety net and retraining programs, not in resisting new technology. Bovine growth hormone raises milk production by up to 30 percent. That remarkable increase could make milk cheaper.
Small farmers fear that large farms will gain more from the hormone. Expensive technology often does produce greater gains for large farms. It's far from obvious that bovine growth hormone will do so. Even if it does, the industry as a whole could suffer greatly from opposing it. Cows are treated with many chemicals. Raising unfounded questions about the wholesomeness of milk is a dangerous strategy.
So too is the shortsighted assumption that the dairy industry faces no competition from other industries. But milk competes with soft drinks, butter with margarine and cheese with synthetic cheese made from casein. All these dairy products stand to become more competitive if the cost of milk is sharply lowered by bovine growth hormone.
Governor Thompson's ban is only temporary, but it has already triggered a similar ban by Minnesota and may spur opposition in other states. The dairy industry and consumers everywhere will be the losers if his obscurantist fight against new technology should prevail.
Solving the problem of financing long-term health care for the elderly is a pressing national priority. Connecticut has taken steps to address that problem, and is awaiting action by Congress that would help put its plan into action.
In 1986, I appointed a special commission to examine private and public responsibilities for financing long-term health care for the elderly.
In 1987, the commission reported that Connecticut was spending $274 million for that purpose. But, it said, with the growth in the elderly population and the projected rate of inflation of health care costs, that sum would grow to $1.4 billion by the year 2000 unless the state did something different. What could be done?  There was substantial evidence that the private sector alone could not pay for long-term care. We realized that a publicly financed social-insurance program was equally unlikely, given America's national budget deficit and competing demands for Federal dollars.
At this point, Connecticut realized that a public-and-private partnership offered the most promising alternative. The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation then gave the state a two-year $350,000 grant to develop such a partnership.
The projected plan, called the Connecticut Partnership for Long-Term Care, was worked out in 1988 and 1980 by the state's executive branch, legislators, insurers, consumers, health-care providers and employers.
It would provide individuals with a way to plan ahead to meet long-term needs for care while also constraining the growth of Federal and state Medicaid expenditures.
The state's primary goal is to enable individuals to receive necessary care without having to impoverish themselves. Under the plan, individuals are offered an incentive of guaranteed protection of assets to purchase private insurance for long-term care in amounts they can afford.
If individuals need such care in a nursing home or at home, they will first receive benefits under their private insurance policy. When that coverage runs out, they can apply for Medicaid and protect one dollar of their assets for every dollar their private policy has paid out in state-approved benefits.
These protected assets can spell the difference between dependence and independence. No longer will people need to go broke to get Medicaid.
Simply put, the partnership would do the following things:
First, it would allow individuals to protect assets equal to the sum their insurance has paid out in approved benefits. Second, it would establish stringent standards for private insurance policies that can offer such protection. Third, it would create a public consumer-information service to help individuals choose appropriate coverage.
Fourth, it would lead to much more affordable policies by encouraging insurers to develop a variety of policies for a wide market, including the poor as well as the affluent. Fifth, it would save state and Federal dollars by delaying enrollment in Medicaid.
By testing this approach, we can demonstrate how far private insurance can go in financing long-term care. It will then be possible to design public benefits that are feasible and cost-effective.
In June 1989, the General Assembly unanimously authorized the demonstration. The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation awarded the state $1.8 million to finance the first three years of a six-year demonstration.
However, since Medicaid is a joint Federal-state program, Federal legislation is needed for the demonstration to go forward. This legislation would waive the requirement that individuals can retain only a bare minimum of their assets before qualifying for Medicaid assistance. Such a measure unanimously passed the Senate last November but still awaits action in the House Energy and Commerce Committee.
We hope that the committee appreciates that the Connecticut partnership is a socially conscious, fiscally sound response to one of the most critical issues facing every state and the nation as a whole.
It offers a middle ground that is feasible, that will provide incentives to individuals to plan ahead and that will provide valuable information to guide a reasoned national solution.
Last week the state of Oregon announced that it would curtail many medical services for the poor -but the move does not demonstrate hardheartedness so much as hardheaded compassion. In a brave experiment, the state hopes to make basic medical services more widely available with intelligent rationing of health care.
America's biggest health problem is the cost of treatment, now nearly $540 billion a year and an astonishing 11.1 percent of the gross national product. That impinges on publicly funded health insurance programs, especially Medicaid, which pays bills for the poor. While Washington sets broad guidelines and shares the cost, states have great discretion over eligibility and coverage.
At present, Oregon residents with incomes at 58 percent of the poverty level qualify for Medicaid. (Nationally the level is less than 50 percent, and in some states as low as 17 percent.) Oregon would raise that level to 100 percent, thus making health coverage available to many more families. But it can do so, the state says, only by setting priorities.
Thus state officials have prepared a list of 1,600 medical procedures, balancing costs against how many people they would benefit. Other factors -how much a person would gain from major surgery, for instance, and the preferences of Oregonians -were also considered. Ailments and injuries above a line to be drawn by the State Legislature will continue to be covered by Medicaid. Those below will not be. All Medicaid coverage for the aged, disabled and the blind, no matter what the procedure, will continue as it has.
Before the state can go ahead with changes in its Medicaid coverage, however, it must get a waiver from the Federal Government. Oregon's Congressional delegation plans to introduce legislation in the Senate and House of Representatives soon. Controversy is certain.
Representative Henry Waxman, chairman of the House subcommittee governing Medicaid, warns against ''fool[ing]  ourselves into thinking there's a lot of fat to be cut from coverage of the most vulnerable people.'' And states that devote little of their budgets to Medicaid might find the Oregon plan a handy way to cut coverage of diseases that are both expensive to treat and lacking a constituency - AIDS being an obvious example.
An argument could also be made that the Oregon initiative amounts to no more than a Band-Aid for the serious ailments of America's health care system. Some are sure to argue that discussion of rationing in Oregon can only distract from the larger debate over national health insurance.
Nonetheless, Oregon deserves credit for confronting the urgent issue: how to reconcile increasingly expensive medicine with finite funds and a seeming infinity of ills.
A man who is in prison for a serious crime is found to have a recurrence of cancer. It is a cancer that can be treated if action is taken promptly; otherwise it is almost invariably fatal. The prison authorities delay, for weeks, his getting the necessary treatment.
Those are the facts, as best I can appraise them, of a troubling case. It is taking place right now, not under some far-off tyranny but in this country.
The prisoner is a doctor himself: Alan Berkman, 44 years old. A graduate of Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons in 1971, Dr. Berkman was drawn into revolutionary politics. In 1987 he was convicted in Federal Court in Philadelphia of possessing explosives and guns and conspiring to store them for underground groups. He was sentenced to 10 years in prison.
While awaiting trial, Dr. Berkman was found to be suffering from Hodgkin's disease, a grave lymphatic cancer. He had radiation therapy, and the disease went into remission.
Dr. Berkman is in the District of Columbia jail now, rather than a Federal prison, because he is also under indictment in the District. This winter he felt something was wrong with him and asked for a CT scan, the sophisticated medical technique used to discover signs of cancer. He had a scan on March 19 at the District of Columbia Hospital.
A hospital doctor said there was no problem. But Dr. Berkman himself saw on the scan film what he believed to be a mass in his abdomen. A prison doctor, agreeing that there was reason for concern, said there must be a biopsy of tissue from the abdomen.
Up to that point the prison authorities had responded to Dr. Berkman's medical concerns with what most people would consider reasonable speed and sensitivity. But since then there have been mysterious delays.
Despite the prison doctor's call for a biopsy, nothing happened for a considerable time. On April 19, a month after the CT scan, Dr. Berkman's lawyer telephoned Federal attorneys. Action sounded imminent, but again nothing happened.
Finally, on May 3, a biopsy was performed at the Howard University Hospital in Washington. It was immediately read as showing a recurrence of Hodgkin's disease.
A cancer specialist was in the hospital and was prepared to examine Dr. Berkman and propose treatment. But U.S. Marshals, who brought the prisoner there and kept his feet shackled during the operation, took him back to the prison half an hour after he came out of the anesthetic.
According to specialists I asked, a recurrence of Hodgkin's disease is fatal unless treated promptly. The indicated treatment is clear: intensive chemotherapy, in a carefully controlled environment because there may be severe side effects. With treatment, the disease often goes into remission.
But as I write, Dr. Berkman has had no treatment. It is eight weeks since his CT scan, 10 days since the biopsy, and still nothing is being done to fight the disease.
One reason for the delay seems to be disagreement about where he should be treated. The Federal Bureau of Prisons has classified Dr. Berkman as a high security risk and says that, if he is returned to its control, he must go to a Federal prison hospital in Springfield, Mo. His lawyers and friends say that there are no appropriate facilities there.
The D.C. Corrections Department has seemed ready for him to be treated in Washington, but again there have been repeated and unexplained delays. The latest word is that he will be examined by a cancer specialist this Thursday, and a plan for treatment proposed.
The department's assistant director for health, Dr. Reginald Jenkins, told me that he wanted to ''avoid approaching this patient in a rushed and hysterical manner. . . . There is time to make a rational assessment.''
Dr. Thomas Garrett, a cancer specialist at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York City, knew Dr. Berkman as a fellow intern 20 years ago. He emphasized that he had not seen the patient. But he said: ''The time scale is just way out of line with acceptable medical practice. If I had a patient with suspicion of such a recurrence, it would all be done within a few days.''
When I was first told about the case, a week ago, I thought to myself that after all it was just one man, a prisoner. But the decency of a system is tested by such a case. Dr. Berkman, in a telephone conversation from the jail, said: ''I'm not the sort of person who assumes the worst about people who deal with me. But I feel like someone forgot that meanwhile the cancer is growing.''  ABROAD AT HOME
The U.S. is failing a basic test of civilized societies, the provision of adequate health care for all its citizens. The latest proof lies in an epidemic of measles - 82 outbreaks in 25 states. It's not that the disease is uncontrollable. The reason is a failure of political will and public health.
Asked last week to name his priorities in health care, President Bush replied: ''I've already spelled them out. I think child health or fitness.'' But the measles epidemic has broken out because the United States lacks an adequate public health system, the Reagan Administration starved the Federal program for childhood immunization, and Mr. Bush has failed to provide enough funds for emergency vaccinations to curb outbreaks of the disease.
In 1983, there were a mere 2,000 cases of measles in the U.S., raising hopes that the virus could be eradicated. But public health funds to cities were cut, and many poor parents couldn't afford to pay doctors $50 a shot for the vaccine. Immunization levels dropped off, giving the virus a chance to regain a foothold among the inner-city poor.
So last year there were 17,000 cases of measles, and 45 children died. In the first four months of this year, 40 died. For the current fiscal year, Philip Hilts reported last week in The Times, the Administration provided only $9 million for emergency measles vaccinations, and that money is now gone. The new fiscal year starts in October - but the new White House budget again requests only an inadequate $9 million.
Asked if he saw any need to push immunization in children, Mr. Bush said last week that ''it hasn't come to my attention that we need to take a stronger approach.''
Mr. Bush might listen to Dr. Stanley Plotkin, chairman of the American Academy of Pediatrics infectious disease committee. ''It is shameful,'' Dr. Plotkin said, ''that a country as rich as this does so poor a job immunizing its infants.''
Medical care cost Americans $600 billion last year, but Washington spent only $156 million for the entire childhood immunization program. As an expression of the priority the nation sets on its children's health, that's shameful indeed. So is the gulf between Mr. Bush's words and deeds.
The National Commission on Child and Youth Deaths was created in 1988 to make the first systematic analysis of mortality among Americans under 18. The group hasn't received money and hasn't met. It's time Congress and the President rectified that.
According to the Child Welfare League of America, about 70,000 children and youths will die this year. Half will be infants; the other half will be between 1 and 18. Infant mortality has received sustained attention; mortality among non-infants has not.
Studies at the state level show some disturbing patterns. In Maine, researchers found that youths who smoke are six times more likely to die than non-smokers. Smoking seems to show a propensity to take risks - sometimes fatal ones. And everywhere, poor children are more likely to die than those from wealthier families.
Knowing more about such patterns could help policy makers target resources and protect young lives. Getting the commission on track would be a healthy start.
''There ain't no such thing as a private doctor around here,'' laments a Harlem man quoted recently in The Times. ''I suffer from asthma. But I'm dealing with it myself. By the time you can see a doctor in the emergency room, you're half dead.''
His story reflects everyday suffering typical in many city neighborhoods. It also helps explain why Medicaid costs are soaring in ways that complicated the recent state budget negotiations. But costs can't be controlled without a serious effort to put doctors and clinics in poor neighborhoods.
Washington pays about half the cost of Medicaid; states and localities split the balance. New York's is one of the most expensive programs. Medicaid now accounts for $3.9 billion of the $29.8 billion state general fund budget - an increase of 12 percent over the previous budget.
Some critics call for benefit cuts, pointing out that New York, unlike other states, covers items like prescription drugs, dental work, podiatry and eyeglasses. But more might be gained by confronting the program's chronic inefficiencies.
One of these is cheating. Storefront ''Medicaid mills'' - offering perfunctory or superfluous care under assembly-line conditions - continue to flourish in poor neighborhoods. At the same time, hospitals define diseases in ways that maximize Medicaid reimbursements. Welfare officials hope to save $115 million this year by fielding platoons of auditors to pursue fraud.
More important, many poor New Yorkers lack access to primary and preventive care - the regular check-ups, treatments for early illness and chronic health problems that most patients receive from a good family doctor. Instead, the poor must rely on hospital emergency rooms and outpatient clinics where care is far more expensive than in a doctor's office. Lately the burdens on the hospital-based services have been made vastly heavier by drug abuse, criminal violence and AIDS, driving Medicaid costs higher still.
How can primary care in poor neighborhoods be improved? One answer is to boost the paltry $14-per-visit Medicaid reimbursement rate for physicians. State health officials propose an increase to an average of $40, but only for services to children. That's a welcome though insufficient gesture; Medicaid costs for adults are three times those for children. It's also unlikely that money alone will bestir doctors comfortably situated elsewhere to move back to blighted neighborhoods.
More ambitious planners contemplate a substantial new investment in ''managed care,'' health maintenance organizations or other group practices sponsored by public health agencies. Under such plans, doctors working together see patients for fixed annual fees.
The state Department of Social Services invites localities to propose such projects and offers $50,000 seed money grants. Only a handful have responded. A serious effort requires more vigorous promotion and more money.
That is hardly the kind of talk Albany wants to hear these days. But the point bears repeating, even in a bad budget year: Controlling Medicaid costs requires sensible incentives for doctors and neighborhood clinics. That means spending a bit more now -to save huge amounts later.
The Federal nutrition program known as WIC - for Women, Infants and Children - is, quite simply, terrific. Its food packages are specifically designed for poor pregnant and nursing women and their children. Because women cannot receive the diet supplements without accepting regular medical checkups, it provides prenatal care for those reluctant to seek it.
The program also increases the gestation period and thus reduces the incidence of fetal and infant death. Babies born to WIC mothers have significantly larger heads, an almost certain reflection of greater brain size, than babies born to poor women not in the program.
But WIC has never had money enough to enroll more than about half of those eligible. And the $2.1 billion Washington is spending this year won't cover those enrolled now. That's because the cost of the food found in the standard WIC package - milk, orange juice, cereal and infant formula - has jumped 8 percent in the last months. As a result, at least half the states have begun to shrink the packages or drop people from the rolls. In Texas alone, 27,000 poor people are likely to lose their place in the program.
Few if any of the dozen or so states that contribute their own funds to the program, including New York, can make up the difference. If there's money to be found for WIC, it has to be found in Washington. That's why Tony Hall, chairman of the House Select Committee on Hunger, and others propose a $150 million increase for next year. Strictly speaking, however, it won't really be an increase. It'll be stay-even money.
Congressional fears about the budget deficit may defeat Mr. Hall. But what's not spent now on WIC is certain to be spent many times over later on - to cure the social and medical ills of low-birthweight babies and mothers who've had little or no prenatal care. There's great humanity in a program that feeds the most vulnerable among us, and a great deal of practical wisdom too.
It was a wedding reception. I was at the bar working on my third glass of ginger ale and gnawing a piece of carrot. At the buffet I had already eaten three pieces of celery and had switched to the carrot to be on the safe side.
You never know when you'll pick up a newspaper and find science has discovered celery causes cancer. A carrot is better anyhow if you're going to the bar. It's sort of like a cigarette, only orange and thicker, and what good is a bar without a cigarette?
Also you cannot look like a man with savoir-faire while eating celery at a bar.
I was drinking ginger ale because they say ginger ale has no caffeine. I don't know why caffeine is bad. America won World War II on caffeine. Also on cigarettes and hard whisky. All of which are now forbidden.
Standing at the bar, I wondered: ''Suppose Hitler had been born 50 years later: Would we now be Nazis because we're too health-conscious to ride the caffeine, whisky and cigarettes to victory the way we did in World War II?''
''Or,'' I wondered, ''could we maybe have won without caffeine, tobacco and whisky? Not likely. America has since given up these vices and now needs 10 or 15 years just to get a new warplane off the drawing board, and even then you can't be sure it'll fly.''
It felt wrong to be wondering like this at the bar. Bars are for brooding, or used to be when I was a child. In those days there were movies in which people sat in bars brooding so beautifully that I could hardly wait to become 21 so I could frequent bars and brood the years away.
Yes, shameful to say, I yearned to brood in bars just as young men today yearn to own German automobiles.
To the ginger-ale drinker beside me I said: ''Did you ever think we'd live to see a day when American lads would rather own German cars than brood in bars?''
Instead of replying civilly, he said: ''You sound melancholy. Are you aware that you could be seriously depressed? You'd better see a psychiatrist.''
This was the first indication I'd had that my being depressed might annoy people. I had deliberately decided to be melancholy because it seemed like something you could still get away with.
I hate to annoy people, and recently it had become harder and harder to avoid doing so. More and more, it seemed that people were going out of their way to find things to be annoyed about. More and more, they seemed eager to hop all over you and pummel you because they were annoyed by something you did every day of your life, or said, or wore, or thought.
''Look,'' I said to my companion in ginger ale, ''I am attending a lavish wedding reception where no expense has been spared to provide gaiety . . .'' ''Exactly,'' said he. ''Be happy.'' ''. . . no expense spared to provide gaiety,'' I persisted. ''Yet I cannot have a martini or two.'' ''I should hope not,'' he said. ''I cannot smoke.''
''Socially reprehensible,'' he said. ''In fact, it might provoke decent, right-thinking people to throw you out.''
''I cannot eat the rich meats, the delicious cheeses or the thick creamy pastries available, but must instead gnaw on this rabbit food.''
''Shows you're not one of those self-indulgent swine who inflate the national health-care bill by stuffing on killer foods.'' ''No caffeine.'' ''No civilized person uses such artificial stimulants anymore.''
''Look around you,'' I said to him. ''The room is filled with women of infinite beauty and great desirability, but I must refuse to look at them.''
''And rightly so,'' he said. ''Sex is over.''
''So you see,'' I explained, ''I have decided to be depressed. Until this very moment I'd thought that being depressed was the one thing a man could still do without having the full weight of American civilization crush him until he joins the Puritan movement.''
''It won't do,'' said he, ordering another ginger ale. ''It just won't do.'' ''I can't even be depressed?'' ''If it really made you miserable, it might be permitted,'' he said, ''but you are obviously enjoying it. The enjoyable is forbidden.''
I have been very happy ever since and eat many carrots.
OBSERVER
Can it be that Japan's alarmingly low birth rate is the Government's fault because it encourages women to get a higher education? That's what Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto told the Japanese Cabinet last week. He has since been backing and filling, but there seems little doubt about the original sentiment - the more women in college, the fewer in accouchement.
Women have not attained full equality in Western societies either, but Mr. Hashimoto's views sound surprisingly quaint. He implies that women do not merit the same chances as men, and that the duty of Japanese citizens is to subject their private lives to the interests of the state, as interpreted by members of its ruling elite like Mr. Hashimoto.
If Japan's goal is to raise its birth rate, keeping its women uneducated seems hardly the best way. Japanese undoubtedly choose to have small families because of the same demographic transition to low fertility and mortality rates experienced by other modern industrial societies. This transition is intensified by the price of land, which has been allowed to reach preposterous heights. The value of Tokyo's land is now said to equal that of the entire United States. The grounds of the Emperor's palace alone are valued at $70 billion, more than all the land in Florida.
The high price benefits Japanese companies, which can borrow vast sums on their land holdings and out-invest their Western competitors. It's less of a boon to young Japanese couples, who must live in cramped quarters and take out 100-year, three-generation mortgages to buy a house.
As Finance Minister, maybe Mr. Hashimoto could do something about the tax system that sustains Tokyo's curious breed of urban rice farmers. If they could only be induced to sell their downtown rice farms, the price of land would fall to more natural levels and the number of rooms per Japanese household would rise, doubtless followed by the birth rate.
That's just a theory, of course, but it would surely win a lot more votes than Mr. Hashimoto's idea of turning back the clock.
The Senator accuses the drug czar of seeking the ''political rewards to be had for tough-guy talk.'' The drug czar calls the Senator's attack ''bilious, dyspeptic, orotund.''
What's going on? It's the latest flare-up in a dispute over financing for drug treatment between Daniel Patrick Moynihan and William Bennett, the Director of National Drug Control Policy. Senator Moynihan makes the better case.
The New York Democrat believes that Washington should spend as much on drug treatment as on law enforcement. Treatment programs around the country are desperately underfinanced; more money would make a big dent in the demand for drugs. The 50-50 recommendation was written into the 1988 omnibus drug bill.
Yet last year the Bush Administration, with Mr. Bennett as drug czar, continued the old pattern of spending - 73 percent for law enforcement and only 27 percent for treatment. The language of the 1988 law, drug policy officials say, wasn't binding.
Mr. Moynihan responded with an amendment providing more drug treatment money from Medicaid, the Federal health insurance for the poor. The extent to which the program now covers substance abuse treatment in hospitals and clinics remains unclear, and it won't cover treatment in residential programs of the sort considered most effective for crack addicts. The Moynihan amendment, passed by the Senate late last year, would ease those restrictions.
Yet Mr. Bennett continues to resist, suggesting that such funds might be better provided through the current setup of block grants to states. Others worry that the amendment's cost, estimated at $700 million a year, is prohibitive.
But block grants, requiring annual Congressional approvals and further red tape at the state level, are less reliable than a Medicaid change, which would guarantee ongoing Federal support. Such a guarantee could spur the rapid development of drug treatment programs.
Is $700 million too much? If that kind of spending looks unrealistic this year, why not at least begin by allowing Medicaid funds for drug treatment of poor women who are pregnant? That would be an affordable investment - focused where it would do the most good.
No one heard a word of the 15-minute speech given on Sunday by Dr. Louis Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, at the San Francisco AIDS conference. Before he had even begun to speak, AIDS activists unfurled a banner saying, ''He talks, we die.'' The secretary's address was drowned out from beginning to end by a roar of shouts and whistles. It's hard to think of a surer way for people with AIDS to alienate their best supporters.
What could have caused such a pointless breakdown in sense and civility? It's not as if society had turned its back on AIDS and those whom it strikes. Gay groups using conventional political methods have persuaded Congress to finance a widespread research effort, now amounting to about $1 billion a year. Though treatments and vaccines are painfully slow in coming, it's not now for want of effort or resources.
The complaints raised by Act-Up, the AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power, were correct. But they were about distinctly secondary issues, like immigration policies and President Bush's decision to pass up the San Francisco conference for a fund-raiser for Senator Jesse Helms.
Act-Up's members had no justification for turning a research conference into a political circus. Science and the democratic process may be moving more slowly than all would like, but both are working in their interests, maybe as fast as could reasonably be expected. While Act-Up members were tying up San Francisco's traffic with sit-downs, tens of thousands of people took part peacefully in New York City's Gay and Lesbian Pride March, a diverse parade watched by 120,000 spectators.
Though there is little value in Act-Up's disruptions, it's worth trying to understand the pressures on its members. Many are infected with the AIDS virus, and are desperate for better treatments. Many feel isolated because of society's still-limited acceptance of gays. Many have seen their world collapsing around them as they lose their jobs, housing and health insurance.
Their rage and despair is part of the unmitigated tragedy of AIDS. Act-Up believes it is better to rage than do nothing, and the group's interventions have probably been effective in issues like speeding up the laborious Federal system of drug trials.
But for all their righteous rage, it's important for them to see that shouting down Dr. Sullivan is counterproductive. If Act-Up's members would only keep their faith in education and hard lobbying and put down their bullhorns, they might find their rage surprisingly well understood, and effective when focused in the right way on the right targets.
''Today we decide only that one state's practice does not violate the Constitution,'' wrote Justice Sandra Day O'Connor in her concurring opinion in the Cruzan case. ''The more challenging task of crafting appropriate procedures for safeguarding incompetents' liberty interests is entrusted to the 'laboratory' of the states.''
New Yorkers who fear seeing the tragedy that is Nancy Cruzan's ''life'' duplicated in their families will pray that Justice O'Connor's words are heard in Albany. Because New York State and Missouri, where Ms. Cruzan is hospitalized, are the only two states whose courts have yet to set policies for decisions on behalf of incompetent patients.
Maine, too, requires ''clear and convincing evidence'' of the incompetents' wishes, but it has legislation that gives those who can no longer speak a say in their treatment. New York does not. But it could, if the Legislature would, before adjourning this week, do what it should have done months ago: pass the health care proxy bill.
That bill permits competent adults to fill out a form designating a person to make health care decisions for them, once incompetence is certified by a physician. The proxy's decisions must then be followed as if they were the patient's.
Although the Assembly passed the bill by a decisive 114 to 29 last month, the Senate has been rendered speechless, it seems, by opposition from some religious groups. But yesterday the New York State Catholic Conference made it formally clear that it doesn't oppose the legislation, provided it embraces previously discussed amendments. With the bishops' position now quite clear, there's no reason left for the New York Senate to remain speechless.
The Senate majority leader, Ralph Marino, is quoted as having qualms about ''giving another person the right to make decisions over someone else's life.'' He's got it wrong. The person making that decision is the person who authorized the proxy in the first place.
Meanwhile, there is the living will. ''Few individuals,'' Justice O'Connor points out, ''provide explicit oral or written instructions regarding their intent to refuse medical treatment should they become incompetent.'' But they can do so by filling out a form like the one below. It is less desirable than the proposed health care proxy form because it can't cover all contingencies. But it does - today -give people a way, until the very end, to take charge of their lives.
The report that injections of synthetic human growth hormone seem to reverse some of the effects of aging is much to be welcomed. Previous recipes for stalling age included regular, strenuous exercise and going on a near-starvation diet. But there are a few catches before couch potatoes and epicures can set their hopes high.
The report in this week's New England Journal of Medicine concerns 12 men, 61 to 81 years old, who were given growth hormone injections designed to raise their hormonal levels up to those of young men. The rationale of the study is that after age 30, the body's pituitary gland tends to produce less growth hormone, and this change may underlie certain symptoms of aging like loss of muscle, increase of fat and thinning of the skin.
After 6 months of this regimen, reports a team led by Daniel Rudman of the Medical College of Wisconsin, the subjects built up muscle, reduced fat and reversed other signs of aging to a degree ''equivalent in magnitude to the changes incurred during 10 to 20 years of aging.'' All subjects had low natural levels of growth hormone; the treatment would not necessarily be so striking in people with higher levels.
Endocrinologists have long been aware of growth hormone's powerful effects on the body's metabolism, but scarcity and ethical considerations have restricted experiments. Since other animals' growth hormones don't work in humans, cadavers were the only source of supply until genetic engineers recently developed ways of producing the human variety in bacteria.
The hormone has been used to improve short stature in children whose pituitary glands make too little. It has been tried by athletes, but without proven effect, perhaps because athletes produce plenty of their own anyway.
The Wisconsin report, like all new medical findings, may prove overexuberant and needs careful checking. Side effects need to be carefully assessed: unavoidable harm tolerated in treating disease is not so acceptable when giving drugs to healthy people. Even if growth hormone proves effective in treating the symptoms of age, the cost of a year's treatment is a hefty $14,000.
Ponce de Leon came to America seeking the fountain of youth and found Florida instead. Growth hormone is almost certainly not the fountain of perpetual youth; there is no reason to suppose it increases the natural life span. But the signs that it might enhance the quality of existing life are promising enough.
At last it seems possible to get younger. Growth-hormone injections have done the trick for a test group of men aged 61 to 81, according to last week's science news. Practically all of them perked up noticeably, regaining scientifically measurable amounts of the mustard commonly associated with younger men.
The press, always ill equipped to cope with good news, made very little fuss over the announcement. There were the inevitable references to ''the fountain of youth'' and the usual reminders that it would take a lot of data before anybody could be sure the injections don't have evil side effects.
Their cost was also heavily emphasized. Something around $20,000 per year was the figure I saw most often. Why this should seem an exorbitant price for rolling back old age was never explained.
Sure, aspirin is a lot cheaper, but it can't stop you from growing hair in your ears either, can it? I know New Yorkers who pay more than $20,000 a year to live in apartments hardly bigger than dog houses.
I heard an absurd commentary to the effect that well-adjusted people would surely rather ''grow old gracefully'' than take the chemical route back to vigor. I forget the name of the young woman who uncorked this thigh-slapper; what I remember is that she was a young woman.
What other kind could philosophize so glibly about growing old ''gracefully''? I have seen people grow old and have done a little of it myself. It is an extremely hard thing to do ''gracefully.''
Never mind June Allyson's insouciance in those TV commercials about splendid new diapers American ingenuity has created for senior citizens; it must be extremely hard to be incontinent ''gracefully.'' (Incidentally, it must also be very hard to be patronized by twerps, twits and politicians as ''senior citizens.'') It takes very young people with their profound ignorance of the experience to believe in the pleasures of ''growing old gracefully,'' just as it takes very young people to write the best stories about dying beautifully. (See Ernest Hemingway's early books.) Youth's inexperience of life predisposes it to this kind of romantic nonsense when it strains for philosophy.
Let us not, however, overlook the obvious fact that the press people conveying the growth-hormone news must have been appalled by it. They are in a very competitive business. They have hopes that nature will do its worst, thus enabling them someday to replace the old people at the top - columnists, boss editors, TV anchors.
It must have distressed them to learn that growth hormones can now keep these old birds going on and on. No wonder the stories so far have emphasized the possibly deadly side effects and the price, which these young poorly paid news people think is outrageous.
Outrageous? Does anybody in the network news departments really think Tom Brokaw, Peter Jennings or Dan Rather is going to turn down eternal youth because it costs $20,000 a year? They probably pay their barbers more.
Of course I don't want to speak for Tom, Peter and Dan, but if any youngsters around a certain Times Square printing plant are composing letters urging me to discover the delights of growing old gracefully, you are hereby urged to forget it, kids.
My own naturally selfish disposition to start getting younger every day foretells, I fear, a possibly nasty new political problem. If a fine, decent, loving person refuses to ''grow old gracefully'' so the next generation can have its day, what of the mean-spirited and selfish multitudes now holding power in America?
I can foresee them clamoring so desperately for age-reversal shots that they drive the price beyond the reach of the next generation. Even worse, beyond my reach.
I can foresee an era when these swinish men have driven the price to $200,000 a year. By that time, having taken the shots for years, I will probably be desperate enough to pay any price, though it means sticking up all-night convenience stores.
At such prices, however, I will no longer be able to afford the injections needed for my dear little grandchildren. And of course I will want to keep them from aging. It would be ludicrous for me to look and feel 27 if my grandchildren were stooped, creaky and wearing June Allyson's wonderful diapers.
In the long run I suppose the Germans and Japanese would probably be the only people rich enough to afford to get younger. Of course, come to think of it, it's been like that for several years now.
OBSERVER
Lucien Paye, head of the O.E.C.D., which groups 24 industrialized countries, was asked what worried him most on the horizon. U.S. budget and trade deficits? Protectionism? Recession?
''It depends if you talk short-term or long-term,'' he answered. The serious concern, out about a decade, ''is demography.'' Third-world countries are building up population at a rate no imaginable economic development effort could accommodate.
As things are going, pressures will become explosive, launching invasion tides of desperate people trying to throw themselves on labor markets. They won't be armed, but will set forth in overwhelming multitudes.
Mr. Paye is a Frenchman, and he was thinking mainly of burgeoning African populations. Already immigration from the south is the most abrasive political issue in France, strengthening the nationalist ultra-right. The issue is sharpening in Italy, a country with no tradition of absorbing the poor from abroad.
For the U.S., the push will mount primarily from Latin America. But the stakes are global because development, environment, peace will be put at risk if the number of people and capacity to sustain them is thrown into such imbalance.
That is why deliberate restraint of science in providing reproductive choice is beyond comprehension. The U.S. is hobbling a humane approach by its obsession with abortion. In the name of ''right to life,'' American militants are disregarding conditions of life for children around the world: nutrition, health care, education at home, famine, disease, war abroad.
During the Reagan Administration, funds for United Nations population control programs were cut because they might be used for abortions. In the last couple of years, threats from American groups have blocked distribution of a pill that prevents development of a fertilized egg.
It is RU486, called the ''French pill'' because it was developed by a French biochemist, Etienne-Emile Baulieu, who won a 1989 Lasker Award for his discovery. The citation said it provided a ''safe, effective'' means for preventing pregnancy and avoiding surgical abortion. Made by the French company Roussel Uclaf, RU486 has been widely tested in France and other European countries. In April, reports on 40,000 cases of use listed only two ''incidents,'' without damaging consequences.
The anti-abortion lobby in the U.S. succeeded in preventing legal importation of the drug under Federal law. Worse, by threatening a general boycott of pharmaceuticals from the German company Hoechst, which controls Roussel Uclaf, the lobby persuaded Hoechst to shut down production. The order was reversed in France by the Government, which had a minority share, so the pill is available here under medical supervision, but not much elsewhere.
Now, a group of San Francisco doctors has decided to test a California law that permits import of banned drugs for experimental purposes, passed to enable investigation of as-yet uncertified treatments for AIDS. The French newspaper Liberation quotes Dr. Bernard Gore as saying, ''Like your Minister of Health, we think this revolutionary discovery is the moral property of women.''
He pointed out that some 300,000 women die yearly of botched abortions, mostly in the third world, and that law or no law, some 300,000 women in California undergo abortions every year.
The difference between a contraceptive pill and RU486 is that it can be taken after insemination. It works in the early stage of pregnancy by countering the hormone progesterone, which serves to attach the fertilized egg to the uterus.
The World Development Forum called RU486 a ''breakthrough for developing countries.'' Dr. Baulieu said, ''It is a far safer method of abortion than any operation in countries where medical facilities are limited.''
But, the Forum said, Hoechst has refused to license production in China, and the World Health Organization is ducking the issue. ''We have no position,'' a spokesman said. A Hoechst spokesman said his company had yet to make a final decision, which would be based on medical reports, chemical trials ''and other issues, such as opinions in society. We will take note of their wishes.''
That is a way of saying that the threat from American militants of commercial loss on its other products has intimidated Hoechst to the point of depriving the world of an urgently needed safeguard. The San Francisco doctors have a chance to prove the pill should be legalized in the U.S., and open the possibility of worldwide distribution. They deserve support.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
In their rush to adjourn, Albany legislators bowed to lobbying pressure and approved three ill-conceived bills. Gov. Mario Cuomo has no responsible choice but to rise above election year politics and veto them.
Labor-Management Rules. A new bill would cripple the bargaining power of cities, counties, public authorities and the state by expanding binding arbitration. Under existing laws, only ''mandatory'' issues - wages, hours and the terms and conditions of employment - can go to binding arbitration if contract negotiations reach an impasse.
Under the bill on Mr. Cuomo's desk, binding arbitration would also apply to ''non-mandatory'' issues like the minimum number of firefighters on a rig or the number of police officers in a patrol car. Superficially, this seems reasonable. But employers are more likely to seek changes than are unions, and arbitrators traditionally favor the status quo on non-mandatory matters. Thus the bill strongly favors unions in the short run.
It would tend to lock into place every concession any union has ever won from a public employer, including those that are wasteful and costly. The measure could also hurt unions in the long run: there are times when they, too, seek changes on non-mandatory issues. This bill would do much more harm than good.
Real Estate Taxes. Another measure would lower the assessments on about 65,000 mixed-use buildings by reclassifying them as residential properties. The buildings - often small commercial establishments with an apartment or two upstairs - did get high assessments this year, but only after years of being underassessed.
Cutting the new assessments isn't fair to those who have been paying an equitable share all along, and the bill could cost a strapped New York City $110 million in tax revenues.
Arming Security Officers. Under this bill, guards working in New York City hospitals, homeless shelters and income maintenance centers would be authorized to carry weapons. That's dangerous. Introducing guns into such facilities invites trouble and puts innocent people at risk. Unions supporting the measure complain about armed attacks on guards. That is a real problem; the solution is not more guns but more trained city police.
What's unsettling about standing in line is the all-too-real possibility that somebody's going to sneak in ahead of you. If what you're waiting for is a movie seat or a restaurant table, losing your place is only an annoyance. If it's a heart or kidney, losing your place is sometimes the difference between life and death.
As of last week, when Gov. Mario Cuomo signed a bill that made New York the first state to insure that organs are distributed fairly, New Yorkers waiting for transplants won't have to worry about somebody jumping the line.
Under the old system, most organ procurement organizations, called O.P.O.'s, were affiliated with hospitals that perform transplants. Organs were generally distributed not on the basis of urgency or an orderly waiting list but in response to the demands of the affiliated hospitals. Furthermore, patients who could afford to consult several doctors were able to get their names on waiting lists at more than one hospital, thereby multiplying their chances in a way the less affluent could not.
Now, however, the five regional state O.P.O.'s will draw up waiting lists and distribute organs accordingly. In addition, transplant candidates can only be on one list.
The bill also provides badly needed public oversight for procuring, storing and distributing human tissues such as eyes, skin and bone. The state system for procuring such tissues was unregulated, thus raising serious public health concerns. Now donors, and donated tissues, will be carefully screened, and tissue banks will have to establish standards for processing and storing.
By passing the Organ and Tissue Procurement Bill, New York has done more than bring order out of chaos. It has given New Yorkers who need transplant surgery an equal chance at life.
Born in the U.S.A.: it should be a matter of pride. But for too many children, being born here constitutes bad luck. That's the substance of a sidetracked report by the White House Task Force on Infant Mortality.
A quarter of the 40,000 infant deaths that occur in this country every year are easily preventable; so are a lot of the handicaps that afflict 100,000 newborns. The problems are primarily attributable to their mothers' lack of prenatal care.
Some officials involved in the study told a Times reporter that it was on hold because the conclusions were an inconvenient reminder of unkept Bush campaign promises. Another official says it just needs further work. Never mind. The report won't be news to health care professionals.
They've known for years that poverty and accompanying ignorance, combined with cuts in Federal programs, have slowed America's steady progress in lowering the infant mortality rate. Today, instead of going down it is being pushed up by crack, venereal disease and AIDS. By this measure, the United States ranks 20th among industrialized countries in preventing infant deaths.
America already knows how to make the rate drop again. Two years ago the National Commission to Prevent Infant Mortality recommended expanded Medicaid coverage and incentives to doctors to take Medicaid patients. The White House Task Force makes similar recommendations, and suggests an increase in Federal spending on prenatal care. Both panels say employers might also contribute.
The Task Force estimates that the steps it recommends would cost $480 million a year. Compare that with the lifetime medical costs for low-birthweight babies; each can run $400,000. Such costs of children now being born to crack-addicted mothers are beyond reckoning.
America can't afford not to spent more on prenatal care, not on economic grounds and not on the grounds of humanity.
The list of drug traffickers in the war on drugs includes a lot of unscrupulous villains: the Colombian drug lords, gangs like the Bloods and the Crips and some U.S. pharmaceutical manufacturers.
Huh? American pharmaceutical manufacturers?
Yes, that's right. The drug companies - and a core group of unwitting doctors who supply the illicit market and keep millions of Americans needlessly addicted to tranquilizers, sedatives and other dangerous controlled substances. Drug companies and doctors also present the biggest obstacle to prescription drug reform and a plan to save taxpayers hundreds of millions annually.
The problem is 41 state Medicaid programs that lack simple oversight over the prescribing of almost 200 types of controlled substances, including the tranquilizers Valium and Xanax as well as dangerous sedatives and amphetamines. Recent Federal data reveal that these controlled substances are responsible for a third of all drug overdoses that turn up in hospital emergency rooms - a total of 80,000 a year, or three times the rate of heroin overdoses.
The nine other states require doctors who prescribe these dangerous legal drugs to use multiple-copy prescription forms, similar to credit-card slips. One copy of the prescription is kept by the doctor; one copy is given to the patient to take to the pharmacy. The remaining copy goes to the state health agency, which can then monitor prescriptions.
The idea is straightforward: Make doctors accountable for their prescriptions of dangerous drugs. This eliminates forgeries, illegal dispensing and fraud by patients, and also reminds doctors that these substances require special attention. The costs of implementing this program to Medicaid, by the way, are minimal.
In each of the nine states that require multiple-copy forms - including New York, Texas, California and Illinois - prescriptions for dangerous drugs fell 35 to50 percent after controls were instituted. Nationally, with 1.5 billion prescriptions issued annually for dangerous drugs, the plan could save hundreds of millions a year.
The benefits are obvious:
* Reductions in prescription drug abuse and associated Medicaid fraud, not to mention decreased illegal diversion of these drugs for resale. New York found that covering just one class of heavy sedatives saved their Medicaid program $24 million in the first year.
* The reduction of illegal prescribing and ''doctor shopping'' by addicted patients . Last year, for example, one New Mexico doctor was responsible for 28 percent of all Valium prescribed to Medicaid recipients in the state.
* The protection of millions of elderly people from drug-induced injury. Some estimates put the number of senior citizens needlessly addicted to tranquilizers alone at 2 million.
Why haven't all 50 states instituted such programs? Because of the strong opposition of drug manufacturers, who stand to lose up to 50 percent of their sales of sedatives, tranquilizers and amphetamines.
How can the U.S. drug companies reasonably defend a system that invites fraud and forgery? How can the pharmaceutical lobby advocate the needless addiction of millions of senior citizens to powerful psychoactive drugs?
This is clearly unacceptable. Limited Medicaid dollars ought to go toward improving services, rather than subsidizing drug abusers and paying for injuries caused by unnecessary medication. Instead of defending their profits, drug companies and organized medicine should join with consumer, elderly and law enforcement groups to support multiple-copy prescription plans.
Julia Child says she is going to continue cooking and eating rich foods. This is outrageous. And what is the Surgeon General doing about it? What is medical science doing about it? They are doing nothing. They are too busy stamping out smokers. Stamping out smokers is good, to be sure. We all feel better every time we come across another filthy smoker who has just been stamped out.
It is delightful to see him writhe in agony. Nobody denies that, but it is time for medical science to move on. Smoke is not the only horror threatening the nation's happiness.
Almost entirely unchallenged by the authorities, rich food is stalking America. Stalking each and every one of us, including our children and even churchgoers.
You can walk into almost any restaurant in America and see rich food on a dozen tables.
There is still not a single city, much less state, anywhere in the Union that requires restaurants to seat rich-food eaters apart from and out of the sight of right-eating people.
As a result, right-eating people often find themselves forced to eat their steamed broccoli cheek-by-jowl with diners whose plates are swimming in butter and other deadly animal fats. This disgusting spectacle may be followed by the arrival of rich, damp desserts filling the restaurant with a threatening sense that lethal sugar is rampant.
Make your blood run cold? Well, how do you think it makes a right-eating person feel when he has to watch the crowd at the next table finish off all this rich food with real coffee?
Yes, coffee packed with insidiously life-shortening caffeine.
Perilous though the restaurant scene may be, it is nothing when set against the ordinary American neighborhood.
How often have you, a right-eating person, set off on a stroll around the neighborhood only to break it off halfway and stagger back home so you could quickly fortify yourself with a draught of salt-free seltzer?
At every step your nostrils were assailed, weren't they? Assailed by the revolting odor of rich food on the fire: the smell of hamburgers thick with ghastly cholesterol blazing on a charcoal grill, of frying - frying! -chicken issuing from a kitchen vent, of frozen cherry pies being thawed in some rich-food eater's oven.
And those cherries - you can bet on it - probably not even grown organically.
It's pretty hard living in a world like this, isn't it? A world where you're so bullied by rich-food eaters that you can't even go out to a steamed-broccoli dinner, much less walk around the block, without being exposed to sights and smells that may be taking years off your life.
And now Julia Child has the gall to say she's going to go right on cooking and eating rich food. What she's really doing is propagandizing. Telling us rich food is good. Trying to wheedle us into tasting some.
Well, it's time to fight back. The Surgeon General and his lab squad should admit they've conquered smoke and take on this fresh menace.
They must fling themselves into their beakers, retorts, laboratory-mice mazes and find evidence. Evidence is everything in these matters.
Once you have evidence, terror is justifiable to crush wrong-living persons. Remember the emboldened airline passengers willing to make smokers walk the wing once they had evidence of the deadly effects of sidestream smoke.
With persuasive evidence from the Federal labs, Julia Child will either have to wax ecstatic over steamed broccoli or turn in her colander.
Far be it from us of the laity to urge a line of inquiry on our nation's scientists, but it is to be hoped they won't forget the happiness they brought us when they discovered the evils of sidestream smoke.
This empowered us to shout, ''You're polluting our breathing space, creeps!'' while stamping out smokers. Until then, creeps could say they were not killing anybody but themselves and we had no argument to justify stamping them out.
Who knows? A little research along these lines into rich food might produce equally wonderful results for right-eating persons. That smell on the air, of sizzling hamburger fat and frying chicken - isn't there a likelihood there that we're inhaling sidestream cholesterol?
As for restaurants, anything can happen back in the kitchen when they're slinging the deadly salt around on the rich-food eater's victuals. Fatal doses could filter onto a right-eating person's steamed broccoli.
It's up to you, science: Let's settle Julia Child's hash.
Some of margarine's supposedly beneficient unsaturated fat is apparently as pernicious as the saturated fat of butter. Experts advise abandoning margarine for liquid vegetable oil. Some people may be more tempted to abandon the experts.
Better, perhaps, is a little patience. Adam Smith discerned an invisible hand in the workings of the marketplace. Science is also kept running by a mysterious but essential mechanism: it's an invisible boot, which kicks into oblivion the many scientific results that are trivial or just plain mistaken.
Nutritional claims seem particularly vulnerable, as in the recent rise and fall of oat bran. The only scientific findings worth betting on are those that have stood the test of time and been amply confirmed and reviewed. The general nutritional advice given by Government agencies - take more exercise; eat less fat - rests on numerous studies reviewed by multiple panels of experts.
The Centers for Disease Control noted last week that 25 percent of people in New York State exercise regularly, compared with 55 percent in Washington State. Since the relation between exercise and heart disease is well established, that's a finding for which it may be worth changing one's life style. Not so the margarine warning. With most food fads, the best strategy for consumers is to await the verdict of the invisible boot, and reach for their running shoes.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
Allison and Jimmy Curran are 3-year-olds, too young to make any but the simplest decisions. Any problem knottier than, say, choosing a television channel must be solved by their mother, Nancy Curran. Their father, Tamas Bosze, has had little say in their lives. Indeed, he was the object of a successful paternity suit brought by Ms. Curran, and made his first child support payment more than two years after the twins' birth.
Now, however, Mr. Bosze is making a huge request of the twins. He wants them to be tested as potential bone marrow donors for his son, Jean Pierre, their 12-year-old half-brother, who has leukemia. When Ms. Curran said no, citing their age and possible complications, Mr. Bosze took his plea to Cook County Circuit Court in Illinois.
The court wisely supported Ms. Curran. ''To subject a healthy child to bodily intrusions,'' wrote Judge Monica Reynolds, would ''seriously infringe and forsake the constitutional rights of the child and render him a victim.''
But on appeal, the Illinois Supreme Court sent the decision back to Judge Reynolds. It ordered that guardians be appointed for all three children to protect their interests during new court proceedings, which are tentatively scheduled for next week.
That Jean Pierre needs help, and that his father is desperate to find it for him, is not in dispute. What is in dispute is how far society can go to save a person's life. Can it go so far as to invade another person's body without his consent? If the court fails to uphold Judge Reynolds's decision, it will be saying precisely that.
It will also be opening a host of other questions. If society has a right to invade a person's body, where does that right end? Should only relatives be compelled to give up the occasional kidney or pint of blood? Or, given shortages, is everyone up for conscription?
These questions may seem unreal. But they won't be if the Illinois Supreme Court doesn't keep Allison and Jimmy Curran safe in their own skins.
Bovine growth hormone is the first of many genetically engineered products that promise to enhance agricultural efficiency. But the hormone is meeting strong resistance, based in part on the stirring of unfounded fears. A recent study by the Food and Drug Administration confirms that the hormone presents no risk to human health.
When injected into cows, bovine growth hormone raises milk production by about 14 percent. The product is opposed by some dairy farmers, who fear so spectacular an increase in production would push less efficient producers out of business.
The farmers have an ally in the Foundation on Economic Trends, which opposes the concept of genetic engineering and has questioned the hormone's safety. Both Wisconsin and Minnesota have enacted a temporary ban on use of the hormone, as has the European Community.
Synthetic bovine growth hormone is made in bacteria programmed with the cow's gene. It is almost identical with the cow's naturally made growth hormone, small amounts of which are present in milk anyway. The traces of bovine growth hormone in milk, whether natural or synthetic, are destroyed in the gut like other proteins. Even if they somehow entered the bloodstream, bovine growth hormone doesn't make humans grow.
The hormone works in the cow by creating a secondary hormone, trace amounts of which are also present in milk. The secondary hormone is identical with its human counterpart, raising the question of whether infant formula made from the milk of hormone-treated cows might be bad for babies, since they could get a larger than normal dose of the secondary hormone. The F.D.A.'s answer is no, because the secondary hormone is present in the same quantities as in mother's milk, and is in any case destroyed in the heating process used to make formula.
Fears about hormones and genetic tinkering have a powerful resonance, but there remains no valid reason for resisting bovine growth hormone on grounds of risk to human health.
All new technologies deserve careful scrutiny, especially genetic engineering because the effects of changing the biological machinery are often hard to predict. But once all reasonable tests have been done, resistance should not continue on the basis of unfounded fears and apprehension. Unless products like bovine growth hormone receive a more informed appraisal, a valuable new technology will be unnecessarily delayed.
The AIDS emergency relief bill that moved so swiftly through the Senate this summer authorized substantial funds for areas where the bulk of the nation's AIDS victims reside. But the Congressional subcommittee appropriated no funds for new programs this year, replacing the bill's earlier message of hope with one of neglect.
Unless the Senate Appropriations Committee shows courage and reverses the subcommittee's decision, that callous message will be the last one many AIDS victims hear.
The bill that passed this summer, introduced by Senators Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts and Orrin Hatch of Utah, authorized more than $700 million to fight the epidemic. Originally it called for spending $300 million in the next two years to relieve urban hospitals that treat thousands of indigent AIDS patients at a cost of $150,000 per case. The bill also called for $300 million for areas that develop comprehensive case management plans. Such plans might head off the epidemic before it threatens entire communities.
The Senate subcommittee fell far short of honoring Congress's commitment. It appropriated only $110 million to continue inadequate existing programs while deferring almost $500 million for new programs for an entire year.
One year might not seem that long to Washington budget makers. But it may represent a lifetime to many AIDS patients. It's also unconscionable to ask strained hospital staffs to struggle along on inadequate resources for another year. Many patients could be tended to more effectively and cheaply through home care services, hospices and specially designed apartment complexes that the bill might make possible.
Some lawmakers cite procedural difficulties -that the bill was passed too late in the year to be properly funded, that it would be too difficult to cut funds from other programs. But this bill was designed as a form of disaster relief, and the disaster is upon us. Perhaps as many as a million Americans are infected. If only a fraction of that number were trapped in the rubble of an earthquake, Congress would act without delay. The AIDS disaster demands a response now, not a year from now.
Reports this week that Congressional budget negotiators were considering cuts in Medicare costs were greeted with howls of protest from senior citizens. The summiteers were said to react by scaling back a key component of their reform plan: to charge upper-income retirees higher premiums.
Such cowardice would be regrettable. With expenditures for Medicare now exceeding $100 billion a year and ballooning even further out of control, the program is surely ripe for cutbacks.
The initial proposal would have cut payments to hospitals and physicians, raised premiums to upper-income beneficiaries and required every retiree to pay higher out-of-pocket costs. The savings would have exceeded $70 billion over five years -about half of all non-defense spending cuts in the budget reduction plan. This astounding saving on a single program justifies the prominence of Medicare reform in the budget negotiations.
Currently, Part B of Medicare covers physician bills - up to a limit - with monthly premiums that are unrelated to the retiree's income. The premiums cover less than one-quarter of the costs of the program; taxpayers foot the rest of the bill. It is this huge subsidy, now spinning out of control, that the summiteers intend to cut. But the mere mention of linking premiums to income generated furious opposition by the same groups that last year forced the repeal of Medicare insurance for ''catastrophic'' expenditures. That program would have imposed a surtax on well-to-do retirees in order to finance insurance for large medical bills otherwise excluded from Medicare.
Yet health-catastrophe insurance was undone because retirees subject to the surtax resented subsidizing poor retirees all by themselves. Under the Medicare reform now contemplated, the well-to-do elderly would be required to pay a larger share of their own care, but would not be asked to subsidize anyone else.
The summiteers are on the verge of recommending budget cuts of $500 billion that will affect nearly every segment of society. Wealthy retirees deserve no special exemption.
All right, New Yorkers, let's take our minds off the Middle East for a minute and all get together to see how fast we can completely destroy David Dinkins.
If we try hard enough, we may make him useless to the city and the people who elected him as early as the end of the year.
He has it coming to him. The man has been Mayor for almost nine months and people are still getting killed and mugged, babies are shot in their strollers and he hasn't even ended the drug problem.
So, everybody - to work. Press: Make sure he looks like an idiot because he likes to play tennis and keeps the fire in his belly instead of his mouth. Businessmen: Knock hell out of him for not doing what you tell him - fix things up but don't ask for taxes. Municipal unions: Sock him hard in negotiations. Parents: Scream at him because you can't handle your kids.
White racists: Tell nasty jokes about him. Like the one about the time he showed up in a dinner jacket and . . . Black racists: Big job for you. Go on spewing the racial vituperation that keeps the papers and TV coming when you whistle.
And Mayor Dinkins, don't go away, there's a part here for you too in destroying yourself. Help people lose confidence in you by not insisting that the law be obeyed and racial harassers put down in one place you could have done it, the boycott of Korean grocery stores. Also, don't appoint a top-quality council of outside advisers to keep ideas and critiques coming in over the heads of bureaucrats.
And all of us, let's go on pretending we don't know what to do about our city and that it can't be governed. Then we can salve our consciences, or what's left of them, by just moving out of town.
If we do all these tasks really well, New Yorkers, we may be able to damage David Dinkins as badly as we wounded Ed Koch, the best Mayor we ever had, for presiding over a city being destroyed by its own citizens.
But if we ever get around to putting social, legal and financial sacrifice where our big New York mouths are, there are some things to do. 1. New Yorkers individually and as a community have to confront and deal with the one most devastating problem we face: the collapse of the minority family. Nothing will happen until then, except that more pre-teen children will be on the streets to maim and kill on the way to adolescence, jail and death.
Parents must look after children properly or face the public anger and rejection of their communities and the penalties of law. This will involve new, tougher standards of parental accountability for educational and disciplinary neglect. Where there are no parents able to handle the children - or no parents at all - society simply must fill the parental role.
We have ducked this too long. If the citywide community does not provide sufficient birth control help, education, social guidance and early job training, then one generation of broken-family children will follow another to the streets, marauders against society. And we will go on asking - but whose children are these? 2. We can tear apart what is mockingly known as the criminal justice system and put it together tighter and tougher. New laws and regulations are needed to eliminate the waste of thousands of cop-years, in arraignments and trials. And there's no use hiring more cops if none of them have the power to say ''move on.'' The state must undo the crime of drugging the mentally ill until they could be thrown on the street and become the city's problem.
And can't somebody be sent to Paris, where neither garbage nor humans foul the streets, to tell us what specific, terrible civil liberty tyrannies Parisians endure to be clean and how we can have some of the same? 3. We can pay with time and effort, as do the volunteers of the I Have a Dream program. Or pay in sharp intellectual attention, as did Mortimer Zuckerman's recent article in U.S. News and World Report about the breakdown of family life. Mostly, we can pay with money - exactly as much as it takes to do the job.
Maybe more businesses will leave the city if we tax ourselves more. Maybe some more New Yorkers who owe their education and jobs to the city will leave. Goodbye.
But maybe new businesses and new New Yorkers will come to a safe and clean city. Meantime, the rest of us will stick with the city, proud to choose doing over whining. And we will have a privilege denied to the quitters - for once, we will really be entitled to yell at whatever mayor is around.
ON MY MIND
Summit meetings have come to mean a gathering of superpowers to discuss their military and political agendas. A wholly different but still vitally important summit meeting will be held this week when more than 70 heads of state come together at the United Nations in an effort to save the world's most neglected resource: children.
The World Summit for Children aims to commit national leaders to meet the health, education and other needs of children in the next decade. And President Bush can play a key role.
Every day, about 40,000 children die from preventable diseases like measles, whooping cough, tetanus, pneumonia and diarrheal dehydration. Even if children survive these threats, they may later be exposed to hazardous working conditions arising from ineffective or nonexistent child labor laws. And an inadequate education may doom them to lifelong illiteracy.
With a little money and attention, many of these problems could be remedied. Sachets of oral rehydration salts cost about 10 cents each; vaccines to fully immunize a child cost about $1.50. The United Nations Children's Fund (Unicef) estimates that most of the world's children could be saved from death and malnutrition at a cost of $2.5 billion a year. And universal primary education could be achieved for an additional $5 billion each year.
It's up to the wealthier nations to lead the campaign. Mr. Bush could pledge an additional $300 million a year for the next decade to fight disease and hunger - about one-eighth of the total needed for that purpose. That's a large sum, given the oppressive Federal budget deficit; but it's in line with America's historical share of global aid to developing countries.
Mr. Bush could also show that he means business by attending to America's own unfinished agenda of children's issues, like reducing the infant mortality rate and expanding Head Start.
Dramatic political changes around the world now make it possible for children to have a ''first call'' on the attention and resources of world leaders. By insuring that their smallest constituents enjoy healthier, happier lives, these leaders can help insure a brighter world future.
The time has come for the Government to underwrite a nationwide effort to produce an effective vaccine against HTLV III, the virus that causes AIDS. Though a frightening new disease, AIDS is no longer so novel that such an effort would be premature.
Samples of the virus have been isolated and their entire sets of genes decoded. The human populations for testing and eventual inoculation with exist and are ready to volunteer. Yet the communities of physicians, and of public and corporate researchers, seem unable to organize the process.
Why is the nation unwilling or unable to expend the effort?
Two scientific reasons are given for the reluctance. One is that AIDS might be caused by a family of closely related variants of the same virus and that therefore no vaccine could be effective. The other is that there are no animals suitable for initial testing and thus no way to be sure a vaccine is safe for testing in people. It seems to me that these objections, though sound, are not conclusive.
There is at least one other reason for our inability to act: fear and hostility directed at a minority. The population at risk and ready to volunteer for testing is largely homosexual. Our leaders apparently do not wish to be involved with this minority. As a result, the clock runs out on thousands of victims without even the beginning of an effort that might prevent new cases. This is a social disaster.
All physicians have taken an oath to do no harm. But in fact they do harm by sitting quietly by, or referring AIDS victims to another physician or hoping the disease will go away after it destroys a few thousand homosexual men and narcotics addicts.
(Nov. 27, 1985)  COUNTERPOINT
Robert Gallo, a leading biologist at the National Institutes of Health, won international fame in 1984 when he co-discovered the AIDS virus and developed the test for detecting its presence. Last week, the agency opened a formal inquiry into that discovery after a panel found evidence of ''possible misconduct.'' What is the meaning of this bizarre cloud that has so suddenly shadowed so bright an achievement?
The point at issue is whether Dr. Gallo's virus was in fact the same entity as the virus detected by his co-discoverer, Luc Montagnier of the Pasteur Institute in Paris. If so, the reason may have been just a case of cross-contamination, as happens in even the best laboratories.
The other possibility is that Dr. Gallo's group deliberately misappropriated the French virus and claimed it as its own discovery. The virus was a tantalizing trophy since it promised its discoverer fame, fortune and a sporting shot at the Nobel Prize. Dr. Gallo vigorously denies he stole the French virus.
The N.I.H. panel is looking into a range of possible misconduct. The panel may of course conclude by exonerating Dr. Gallo completely, and indeed has already established that he was working on viral samples of his own at the time the French virus was in his laboratory. That goes to undercut critics who suspect he never succeeded in isolating his own samples of the virus.
Suspicions about the origin of Dr. Gallo's virus arose from the moment that its hereditary material was chemically analyzed. Its DNA sequence turned out to differ from that of the French virus by only 2 percent. Because the AIDS virus is so variable, the difference in DNA looks too slight for the two viruses to be unrelated. But no one can say for sure.
Whatever the outcome of the inquiry, it is important not to forget the role played by Dr. Gallo's laboratory in the early days of the AIDS epidemic. At a time when few researchers cared to pursue the strange disease, Dr. Gallo had already established expertise in studying the class of viruses to which AIDS belongs and in the techniques for growing the T-cells of the body's immune system that the AIDS virus infects. His laboratory became a vital international exchange for specialized techniques and materials.
In that capacity, Dr. Gallo had supplied his French colleagues with reagents they needed, and had been asked by them to study their virus. This was an instance of cooperation between close competitors, the ideal of how science is meant to work.
But Dr. Gallo, like many scientists, pursued credit aggressively, and at times perhaps excessively, as in the case of the special line of cells he used to grow up the AIDS virus. The line was lent to Dr. Gallo by its developers, Adi Gazdar and Paul Bunn of the Veterans Administration. Dr. Gallo changed the name of the cell line for various technical reasons and gave Dr. Gazdar and Dr. Bunn only minor credit. He later confirmed that his cell line was derived from theirs.  The inquiry into the origin of the AIDS virus has already laid bare the fierce competitive pressures and desire for credit that often drive the hottest areas of scientific research. On the whole, those pressures serve the public interest by speeding the pace of scientific advance. Without Dr. Gallo's thirst for success, the fight against AIDS might well have taken a year or so longer getting started. That's worth keeping in mind, whatever the N.I.H.'s investigation concludes.
Robert Gallo, a leading biologist at the National Institutes of Health, won international fame in 1984 when he co-discovered the AIDS virus and developed the test for detecting its presence. Last week, the agency opened a formal inquiry into that discovery after a panel found evidence of ''possible misconduct.'' What is the meaning of this bizarre cloud that has so suddenly shadowed so bright an achievement?
The point at issue is whether Dr. Gallo's virus was in fact the same entity as the virus detected by his co-discoverer, Luc Montagnier of the Pasteur Institute in Paris. If so, the reason may have been just a case of cross-contamination, as happens in even the best laboratories.
The other possibility is that Dr. Gallo's group deliberately misappropriated the French virus and claimed it as its own discovery. The virus was a tantalizing trophy since it promised its discoverer fame, fortune and a sporting shot at the Nobel Prize. Dr. Gallo vigorously denies he stole the French virus.
The N.I.H. panel is looking into a range of possible misconduct. The panel may of course conclude by exonerating Dr. Gallo completely, and indeed has already established that he was working on viral samples of his own at the time the French virus was in his laboratory. That goes to undercut critics who suspect he never succeeded in isolating his own samples of the virus.
Suspicions about the origin of Dr. Gallo's virus arose from the moment that its hereditary material was chemically analyzed. Its DNA sequence turned out to differ from that of the French virus by only 2 percent. Because the AIDS virus is so variable, the difference in DNA looks too slight for the two viruses to be unrelated. But no one can say for sure.
Whatever the outcome of the inquiry, it is important not to forget the role played by Dr. Gallo's laboratory in the early days of the AIDS epidemic. At a time when few researchers cared to pursue the strange disease, Dr. Gallo had already established expertise in studying the class of viruses to which AIDS belongs and in the techniques for growing the T-cells of the body's immune system that the AIDS virus infects. His laboratory became a vital international exchange for specialized techniques and materials.
In that capacity, Dr. Gallo had supplied his French colleagues with reagents they needed, and had been asked by them to study their virus. This was an instance of cooperation between close competitors, the ideal of how science is meant to work.
But Dr. Gallo, like many scientists, pursued credit aggressively, and at times perhaps excessively, as in the case of the special line of cells he used to grow up the AIDS virus. The line was lent to Dr. Gallo by its developers, Adi Gazdar and Paul Bunn of the Veterans Administration. Dr. Gallo changed the name of the cell line for various technical reasons and gave Dr. Gazdar and Dr. Bunn only minor credit. He later confirmed that his cell line was derived from theirs.  The inquiry into the origin of the AIDS virus has already laid bare the fierce competitive pressures and desire for credit that often drive the hottest areas of scientific research. On the whole, those pressures serve the public interest by speeding the pace of scientific advance. Without Dr. Gallo's thirst for success, the fight against AIDS might well have taken a year or so longer getting started. That's worth keeping in mind, whatever the N.I.H.'s investigation concludes.
People keep writing to ask if I survived the bee sting reported here on Aug. 29. The answer is yes, but these letters are troubling. Do my published columns since Aug. 29 read like something written by a deceased person?
I have just reread them all and admit, yes, there is a certain lifelessness in them. Still, practically all newspaper columns seem to be issuing from the grave, don't they? Have mine since Aug. 29 been deader than the national average?
Maybe. Ever since the bee sting, life has seemed hostile and leaden. Something bleak always seems on the verge of happening, and this sense of impending bleakness has settled into my marrow. It is bound to take the last ounce of life out of a literary form as moribund as the newspaper column.
The hostility that seems to threaten me appears to originate among nature's smaller life forms, as though the bee that administered the first sting may have been just a shock trooper in the first wave of some all-out assault by bugs which is being mounted against me.
Just 10 minutes ago, for instance, I saw a small wolf spider loping up my pants leg, apparently headed for the pocket where I keep small change. Flicking him off and into the trash basket in something close to panic, I hurried outside with the basket and dumped it.
Then to calm myself, I walked into the garden and saw, apparently floating free in the sunlight, level with my nose, a minute living creature. Close inspection disclosed another spider. This one was extremely small and apparently weightless, for it seemed to move through the air in defiance of gravity.
Amazingly, it started moving toward me with sinister determination. I turned and left briskly, relieved to discover that I could move faster than the weightless spider without having to run like a coward.
These bug events began with the bee sting, although, to be totally factual about it, I might have escaped the bee sting without evil results if I hadn't used bare fingernails in a messy and unsuccessful attempt to get the stinger out.
The 10-day supply of prescription drugs needed to prevent an onset of fatal blood poisoning was slightly cheaper than a weekend in Paris, which is the usual cost of prescription drugs. But of course there would be the soul-crushing months of paperwork and correspondence required before the health-insurance finaglers agreed to come across with their constantly diminishing share of the bill.
Blood poisoning is quick compared with the agony inflicted by the health-insurance industry. If the immediate post-bee-sting columns were especially lifeless, that was how I felt at the prospect of going to the mat with a vast bureaucracy determined to wring the life out of me for trying to collect what our contract obliged it to pay.
All right, the bee had failed in its mission. So had the bacteria from my fingernails. Though the health-insurance company looked as invincible as ever, all seemed not too sick with the world when I noticed this terrible mosquito bite, right there at the belt line.
It itched for two or three days, but when you are busy copying forms in quintuplicate for insurance finaglers, who has time for mosquito bites? I finally did and noticed a tiny black spot at the center of it. Examined under bifocals, this proved to be not a spot, but a living organism: a tiny, tiny tick.
In fact, a deer tick, infamous carrier of the Lyme disease spirochete. Of Lyme disease it is said that it will probably not be terminal or fatally crippling and may not even be annoying if you take action right away.
Action in the medical world these days usually means contributing to a bonanza for the prescription-drug industry. For some reason, though, the tick pills are delightfully cheap. A six-week supply costs less than a weekend in Asbury Park.
The price is so low that for the tick-bitten it's hardly worth the agony of trying to make the health-insurance people cough up.
Still they do something to the stomach, these pills, that make your other parts aware of their mortality. Can it be the pills, too, that create this sense that something out there, something capable of organizing bugs in malevolent schemes, is out to get you?
Stinging bee, biting deer tick, romping wolf spider, that strange little airborne spider out in the garden - don't tell me it's paranoia. No jokes either about bugganoia. That bee sting could have been the first stage of - OUCH!
OBSERVER
A New Yorker for whom the simple explanation never suffices has been wondering why she's been so down lately. Way down. It's too early in the season for anyone to be afflicted with SADD - that curious mood disorder that's said to arrive when the sun is low in the sky - and she is unaware of any curious conjunction of the planets. Saturn, in other words, is behaving itself.
So what accounts for the grayness of the day, the shabbiness of the spirit? Is it, she wondered, mal de siecle? Not at all, according to this week's Science Times. She is suffering from mal de TV.
Studies of television addicts (people who watch an average of 56 hours a week) indicate that ordinary viewers (about 30 hours) report feeling less relaxed, less happy and less able to concentrate after TV than they do after sports, reading or gardening.
Of course! During the last 10 days this New Yorker has added one Jackie Collins, two Danielle Steeles, a Ferris Bueller and a docudrama about somebody's heart attack to her usual (one soap, the news and a ''Cagney and Lacey'' rerun) fare. Small wonder she is down. Way down.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
The House and Senate each would raise excise taxes, which would hit the poor and middle class hard. That has impelled Congress to also raise taxes on the rich. The problem is finding a way that won't incur a Presidential veto.
One option is to raise the tax rate on the highest incomes from 28 to 31 percent. Because of an anomaly known as the "bubble," that would wind up lowering taxes for families earning between about $80,000 and $200,000, who now are in a 33 percent marginal tax bracket. To avoid such favoritism, Congress is considering two changes.
The Medicare payroll tax now applies only to earnings under $51,300. That could be extended to $125,000 or more. Second, the Senate has approved a plan to lower the total amount of deductions wealthy families may take.
To avoid these adjustments on behalf of fairness, some Democrats call for raising the top tax rate to 32 or 33 percent. But the difference is trivial.  The Senate plan to reduce deductions equals slightly more than a 1 percent hike in marginal tax rates; extension of the Medicare payroll tax represents roughly another 1 percent hike. It's hard to see much difference between 33 and 31 + 1 + 1.
Legislators from New York and California are nonetheless worried about reducing deductions, fearing that their high-tax states would be victimized. But in practice the Senate plan poses no such threat. For example, it would disallow $5,000 of deductions for families with incomes of $200,000. Yet virtually any family with that much income would claim deductions far in excess of $5,000. The Senate plan would affect families the same whether they live in low- or high-tax states.
The fears of New York and California would become frighteningly valid if conferees hit deductions much harder than the Senate plan. Republicans have just surfaced one such proposal targeted on families with very high incomes. That would strike hard at New York City and a few other big cities that levy high taxes to serve large poverty populations. The impact would be regionally punitive and unacceptable.
The Democratic alternative -- a surcharge on taxes owed by families with incomes over $1 million -- would be preferable. It would be still better to raise the gasoline tax by at least 8 cents, collecting revenue and promoting conservation.
Apart from the Republican deduction plan, it's all over but the shouting -- and embarrassed Americans can hope it will soon be over, too.
Now the Department of Agriculture has released a study that translates those findings into money. The study, conducted by Mathemetica Policy Research, found that when poor women received WIC food packages during pregnancy, Medicaid spending was up to $598 less for the mother and child just in the first 60 days after birth.
The reason's simple. A Medicaid recipient enrolled in the WIC program has a much lower chance of having a low-birthweight or premature baby likely to need expensive attention in a neonatal intensive care unit. Every dollar spent on the prenatal WIC program, the study found, saves from $1.77 to $3.13 in Medicaid costs.
Federal funds cover about half the eligible women and children. State funds from the generous 19, New York among them, cover thousands more. If the 31 other states can now find room in their budgets for WIC, the result would be healthier babies -- and a healthy cut in medical bills.
Elderly families on Medicare are liable for deductibles, coinsurance and the costs of catastrophic illness that exceed Medicare's tight limits on hospital and physician reimbursements. Medigap policies cover some of these costs. And the policies include a dizzying array of exclusions, limitations and conditions. The policies, not standardized, are hard to understand and virtually impossible to compare.
Fearful of financial ruin and ignorant of Medigap provisions, the elderly have acted desperately. Nearly a third, according to Consumers Union, have bought redundant coverage, spending hundreds and even thousands of dollars on policies they do not need and cannot use. Lacking proper counseling, these elderly people have fallen prey to unprincipled insurance agents.
At the instigation of Representative Ron Wyden of Oregon and Senator Thomas Daschle of South Dakota, Congress has now passed ambitious reform. The new law forbids the sale of a Medigap policy to anyone who already owns one, unless the policyholder signs an intention to drop the first policy.
The law calls for the creation of 10 standard policies to replace the thousands of alternatives now sold so that policyholders can more easily compare one with another. The bill also forbids the sale of Medigap to individuals on Medicaid, which covers all health-care costs of the poor.
The most important part of the legislation may be none of these new regulations. It authorizes $10 million for setting up counseling programs at local Social Security offices. Armed with information and impartial guidance, the elderly would no longer be easily exploited.
There is a danger that the new law will prove overly restrictive, stifling legitimate competition. Congress might have put more money into counseling and studied the results before resorting to new regulations. Even so, the new law is a triumph. For elderly Americans to spend meager incomes on redundant Medigap policies is an outrage about to disappear.
A demented man was stretched on his back, near Madison Avenue, eight blocks south of the woman in the Park Avenue gutter, shouting out loud to the demons of his mind. A mile on, a few steps away from the office, a woman lay in a doorway as she does every day, in filth of body and pain of mind. She clutched the bottle of liquor almost never out of hand -- the gift of death by poison that passers-by give to her with their coins.
About 15,000 mentally ill people live on New York streets -- almost one-third of the homeless. But this is not one more New York horror story. I have seen the Park Avenue lady and the raw faced woman in the doorway in Chicago, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Houston, Miami. If you travel America, try getting away from the homeless mentally ill -- try.
How did we get to this point, where Americans calmly accept the fact that we cannot deal decently with scores of thousands of destitute Americans who suffer so desperately in their minds that they cry their pain in the streets, where we send them to live? When and why did this country accept madness in the streets as part of the city scenery, turn its back on the deeply disturbed, unless they happened to defecate in front of our delicate eyes? In the mid-50's, there were more than 550,000 patients in American public mental health hospitals. Now there are about 100,000.
The public saw the mental hospitals as snake pits. Some were, and some were not, but closing them was supposed to save the states a nice pile of tax money. A little later, tranquilizer drugs speeded the emptying of the wards. But on the streets, without care or attention, the mentally disturbed did not take the drugs, and regressed rapidly.
The idea was to give the mentally ill post-hospital care in halfway houses or community centers. Officials and taxpayers never came up with enough money. When the hospitals closed, the mentally ill poor went into the street. That helped push at least a third of them into even more nightmare worlds -- alcoholism and drug addiction.
They found friends -- organizations and individuals who try to help them get off the streets. But God help them, they also found some "advocates" who insist that living on the sidewalk month in month out, freezing or baking, the prey of human street rats, eating garbage, and refusing treatment or even food and shelter is an acceptable alternative life style. As long as they do not commit a serious crime -- not just the misdemeanor of befouling private or public property -- they have the right to live in the streets and the right to die there.
Some advocates argue that there is no such thing as mental illness, just another way of looking at reality. Maybe they are right. Is what we have come to accept really sanity -- that mental illness is a right to be exercised to the point of suicide rather than a disease demanding medical care for the victim?
Is it sanity to say that if you are bleeding from a car accident an ambulance will take you away, but if you are bleeding from the mind you can lie there until you rot?
Is caring for people too sick to know they need care truly a violation of their freedom?
It is a disservice to all the homeless to lump their problems together. That makes homelessness seem unsolvable, when it is not.
The economically destitute homeless need economic help -- and can respond to it as full members of society, not some murky, psychically troubled mysterious underclass.
The addicts or mentally disturbed -- estimated at 70 percent of the homeless -- need a range of treatments if they are to escape the streets into decent housing. Is it beyond the American legal and medical mind to provide that help, even to those who do not grasp that they need it?
If we won't put enough taxes -- yes, taxes -- or attention into doing the job, let's have the honesty not to blame the Governor or Mayor. Let's just shut up, keep on walking away from the lady on Park Avenue, and enjoy our next Thanksgiving.
ON MY MIND

Mr. Fernandez offers a number of reasons that the school system must be more concerned about sexual activity among teen-agers. New York City accounts for 20 percent of all reported AIDS cases in the U.S. among 13-to-21-year-olds. The number of teen-age girls treated for syphilis in New York increased 150 percent between 1980 and 1989. And in 1988, nearly 30,000 young women under the age of 20 became pregnant.
By making condoms available, on demand, to the city's 261,000 high school students, Mr. Fernandez could have a favorable impact on public health as well as on the high school graduation rate. Although some critics are balking at the failure to require counseling, the program will succeed best with the fewest restrictions.
Under Mr. Fernandez's proposal, each school would develop its own plan, with participation by parents and subject to review by the Chancellor, for making condoms available. The condoms could be distributed by designated teachers either at specific times or upon a student's request, during school hours.
Students would continue to receive brochures on AIDS, and an updated curriculum on AIDS and sex education, which includes a discussion of abstinence, is expected to be ready by next summer.
At least three of the seven central board members have expressed reservations about extensive, unrestricted distribution of condoms in schools. But a majority ought to conclude that safe sex is one of the most important lessons many students can learn.

In April the District of Columbia's Court of Appeals wisely overturned the lower court's order, saying that the only factor to be considered was what Mrs. Carder wanted, determined from all available evidence. "The right of bodily integrity," Judge John A. Perry said, "is not extinguished simply because someone is ill, or even at death's door." Meanwhile Angela Carder's parents, Nettie and Dan Stoner, sued the Medical Center for malpractice and civil rights violations.
Last week, in an out-of-court settlement, Mr. and Mrs. Stoner received an undisclosed sum of money from the hospital. They may also have found some consolation in the knowledge that their daughter's death had spurred the medical center into developing a policy that should be a model for hospitals throughout the nation.
No longer will the hospital run routinely to the courts for decisions that should more properly be made by patients and their doctors. Instead the new policy upholds a pregnant woman's right to determine her own health care, declaring that "respect for patient autonomy compels us to accede to the treatment decisions of a pregnant patient whenever possible." If she is incompetent, the policy says, "the hospital will accede to a well-founded surrogate's decision whenever possible."
Should the patient's wishes conflict with her doctors' professional standards, the physicians can go to the hospital's ethics committee, or withdraw from the case. But they may do this only if other doctors are available and there is an "overwhelming consensus" among them that a procedure poses little risk to the woman and could possibly save a fetus from "imminent harm."
At G.W.U.'s Medical Center, then, there will be no more Angela Carders wheeled away for surgery that they didn't choose and that their families were helpless to prevent. May there be no more Angela Carders anywhere in this country.
The ethicists, while rightly vigilant, seem in this case to have gone overboard. The armed forces have long had the unquestioned right to treat military personnel with vaccines or drugs already approved for use by the Food and Drug Administration -- whether or not individual soldiers wanted to be treated.
Soldiers are routinely vaccinated against polio, tetanus, malaria, yellow fever and other diseases lest they endanger not only their own health but the safety of others and the success of their mission. So too, in civilian life children are required by state laws to be vaccinated against measles, polio and other diseases before they can attend school.
What has triggered the current debate is the use of drugs that have not been fully tested and approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Ordinarily, such "experimental" drugs could not be administered without informed consent. But the Pentagon has been granted two waivers by the F.D.A. and seeks a third. All three drugs have passed initial safety tests in both animals and humans. They have simply not been proved effective against chemical warfare agents through the rigorous three-stage human tests generally required for approval.
One drug, pyridostigmine, is approved for use in civilian life against myasthenia gravis, a nerve disease. Now it will be given to troops as a pretreatment to lessen the effects of nerve gas. It hasn't been adequately tested for that purpose because it's impossible to expose subjects to nerve gas to see if it works. Another substance, a vaccine against botulism toxin, has been used for years by laboratory workers with the approval of the Centers for Disease Control. But it hasn't been tested widely enough to win full F.D.A. approval.
The Pentagon is also seeking approval to protect troops against mustard blistering agents with a skin cream that has long been used as a cosmetic but never been tested as a drug treatment.
None of these uses are "research" or "experimentation" in any meaningful sense. They're an attempt to protect soldiers against chemical agents with drugs and vaccines that have never been fully approved for that purpose but are the best treatments available. In this case, the military is acting more like Florence Nightingale than Josef Mengele.
The risk that an infected doctor or dentist will transmit the virus to a patient appears very small. There is no risk whatever in face-to-face contacts between most doctors and their patients because the AIDS virus is not transmitted by breathing, touching or other routine contact. The only concern is that an infected doctor might cut himself and then allow his infected blood to mingle with the patient's or contaminate surgical instruments.
Such accidents have rarely occurred. More than 160,000 cases of AIDS have been reported in the United States over the last decade, and an estimated 1 million Americans are believed infected with the AIDS virus. But not a single case has been reported in which a surgeon or other doctor infected a patient and only one case in which a dentist appears to have infected patients. The greatest risk from an infected doctor may be possible impairment of skills due to the illness.
Many health authorities oppose efforts to identify infected doctors or order their activities restricted. They warn that an infected doctor's career would probably be destroyed as panicky patients abandoned him and that the health care system can't afford to lose scarce talent. Better to keep information about infected doctors private, they say, and let the medical profession decide, as cases arise, whether it is necessary to restrict a doctor's activities.
That approach smacks of father-knows-best paternalism. No matter how small the risk, it is the patient, not health authorities, who should decide whether to take it. Some patients may well conclude that a particular surgeon, even if infected, is so superior to his colleagues that they want his services. Others may elect to find an uninfected doctor of comparable skill.
The health care system is in little danger of a major loss of talented professionals. In the entire decade of the AIDS epidemic, only 42 surgeons and 156 dentists and dental hygienists have come down with full-fledged AIDS. Hundreds more are probably infected with the virus. But surgeons and dentists are not in short supply, and in any case there is plenty of useful work for infected doctors to do, either in roles that do not require invasive surgery, or in caring for AIDS patients, often shunned by mainstream doctors.
Mandatory testing of all doctors is not needed. A voluntary honor system would suffice. Doctors and dentists who have reason to believe they were exposed to the virus should have themselves tested. If infected, they should either stop doing invasive procedures or tell their patients they are infected. That approach has been endorsed by the American Medical Association and American Dental Association but rejected by the New York State Department of Health. The medical association has it right: doctors, as a matter of medical ethics, "should err on the side of protecting patients."
Meanwhile, the need for more spending on mental health needs in communities, especially New York City, remains urgent. Tens of thousands of mental patients who once might have been hospitalized live in desperation on the streets.
Few governors or mental health commissioners have dared to confront this imbalance. Hospital unions and upstate towns dependent on hospital jobs wield too much influence in the Legislature.
This year, however, the mental health featherbed can no longer be considered untouchable in the face of a $6 billion state deficit.
Mr. Cuomo's budget for 1991 would reduce the $1.98 billion mental health budget by $110 million. All but $5 million would be cut from hospitals, rather than community programs. Mr. Cuomo and his Mental Health Commissioner, Richard Surles, would close the Gowanda Psychiatric Center this year and two or three more after that. Hospital staffs throughout the system would be cut back this year by 2,800, or 10 percent.
To Restore New York City
First, Reclaim the Streets
Those plans are likely to stir outrage in upstate communities. Yet even four closures would only reduce the network to 18 hospitals -- the same number as in the 1960's, when the system housed some 90,000 patients instead of today's 14,000.
Mr. Cuomo's mental health budget does not offer much immediate comfort to New Yorkers appalled by the presence of homeless mental patients. But by inflicting most of the pain on hospitals while holding community programs harmless, the Governor sends a welcome signal: The political lock on mental health policy may at last be broken.
For the sake of controlling Federal deficits, entitlements will have to be reined in. And for the sake of fairness, what is spent for entitlements will have to be targeted on the needy.
That's exactly what the Bush Administration now proposes. The particular recommendations are modest. But even in last fall's monumental deficit reduction package, Congress rejected stronger measures. Now the White House wisely seeks to win the principle; once won, it can be applied more boldly later.
By targeting entitlements, the White House is pressing to take the fairness issue away from the Democrats. They are already ridiculing Mr. Bush's persistent desire to cut the tax on capital gains because it would hand over billions to wealthy families.
The Administration is unlikely to win this battle of populist appearances; its overall budget weighs heavily toward the affluent. The lower capital gains taxes would give them back billions. And, according to estimates by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, the budget would reduce non-entitlement programs for low-income families by more than $750 million.
Mr. Bush would save $91 million by requiring families with incomes over $150,000 to pay higher monthly premiums for Medicare. Even so, these rich families would still be getting a Federal subsidy of nearly $1,700 a year.
The budget also proposes to eliminate price support subsidies for farm operators with
non-farm
income of more than $125,000. This would save only $36 million but would underscore the fairness principle in yet another sector.
Another Administration proposal would reduce subsidies to middle-income families, but not harshly. Subsidies for school lunches would be lowered, increasing costs by $11 a year for families with incomes above $20,000. Likewise, Federal grants for the neediest college students would be increased, at the expense of middle-income families, which would be offered loans instead. And benefits would be raised for needy survivors of military personnel who die as a result of service-connected injury or illness, and needy families of retired railroad workers.
The details of each proposal warrant scrutiny. What warrants immediate welcome is the principle of directing entitlements to the people most entitled: the poor.
The percentage of low-birth-weight babies is up. So is the percentage of babies born out of wedlock to adolescent mothers. The percentage of babies living with both parents went down. Moreover, life improved little as the children grew older. The violent death rate for teen-agers rose 12 percent from 1984 to 1988. And the juvenile incarceration rate rose 41 percent from 1979 to 1987.
Over all, the percentage of American children in poverty rose 26 percent between 1979 and 1989, and whites suffered along with blacks. Although black and Hispanic children are far more likely to be poor, the percentage of white children living in poverty rose 36 percent.
There's little reason to believe that these figures will soon improve. With one big exception, Mr. Bush's budgetary proposals involve more sleight-of-hand than substance. The exception is his proposal for generous increases in the Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC) and smaller increases for childhood immunization. Both proposals could further reduce the childhood death rate.
Mr. Bush also proposed to lower the tragically high infant mortality rate in 10 American cities. But to achieve that result he may put poor infants in other parts of the country at risk. That's because the money for the cities initiative will be siphoned away from some community health centers -- specifically the centers' year-old rural outreach program -- as well as from the Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant. Mr. Bush thus flouts the recommendations of his own Task Force on Infant Mortality, which last fall urged increased funding for both.
Although he has been extravagant in his praise for Head Start, the President is reluctant to put money where his mouth is. The suggested increase for the program is more than enough to stay ahead of inflation but nowhere near enough to realize Congress's goal for Head Start -- enrolling every eligible child in America by 1994.
And the proposed 16 percent cut in foster care will have a cruel effect on the kind of preplacement services that make it possible for a child to stay
out
of foster care, like counseling for families and various prevention activities.
What is truly sad about this aspect of the President's budget is that the money is coming out of programs that work. If America is still not certain about how to help its troubled teen-agers, it has more than a few good ideas about how to help the very young. Help them today, and there'll be fewer poor and desperate kids tomorrow.
The proposal has provoked strong responses. "Just the thought of it  [ giving her 13-year-old daughter a condom ]  repulses me," a Brooklyn mother said. "It would be taking away her beauty, virtue, innocence." A Bronx high school teacher disagreed. "Condoms can't tear apart nuclear families or usurp parental influence. And they can't cause children to be promiscuous. The kind of power that condoms have is to protect against HIV infection and save lives. I think this is the most moral thing we can do."
That Bronx teacher is probably right -- and the only reason for the "probably" hedge is that the few studies measuring the effects of condom distribution in schools tend to be contradictory. They were done, mostly, before most Americans understood AIDS and its implications.
But nurses and social workers in school districts that have started condom distribution say the programs, along with sex education and safe sex counseling, have protected some sexually active students and convinced others to defer intercourse.
One fact is unassailable. AIDS kills, and kids are getting it. That's reason enough for the board members, when they meet on the issue on Feb. 27, to cast their votes for saving lives.
When deinstitutionalization was first undertaken in the 1960's, it seemed a noble aim. Coupled with the use of such "wonder drugs" as Thorazine, it was perceived as a humane way of returning patients to their communities while cutting the costs of their treatment.
In practice, deinstitutionalization did not work. The vast majority of the patients discharged from state hospitals were not looked after by the community, were not adequately treated by outpatient facilities and rapidly drifted into homelessness, destitution, misery and sometimes death. Indeed, the late Seymour Kaplan, the psychiatrist who pioneered deinstitutionalization in New York State, often said later that it was the gravest error he had ever made.
Under ideal conditions, that is, in communities where there may be a very exceptional communal sense of responsibility, deinstitutionalization can work. But in a large, bustling, indifferent city, such as New York, it has no chance of success.
There is indeed a "hard core" -- perhaps 25,000 in New York State alone -- of very disabled patients who have to live in chronic hospitals. Most are deeply psychotic and lacking in social skills; many in addition have medical, physical and neurological problems: retardation, autism, epilepsy, AIDS, Alzheimer's.
In addition to these permanently ill people, there are others, another 25,000, who do very well outside, for years at a time, with adequate support and crisis facilities and medication -- but then relapse, become deeply psychotic again and have to be readmitted, often forcibly, to the hospital. City and university hospitals have limited capacity and can admit psychiatric patients for only short periods. The relapsed schizophrenic, however, needs months to restabilize, and only state hospitals can provide such long-term care.
Nothing has been sadder than the steady deterioration of the state hospital system since the mid-1970's. The hospitals are not only underpopulated but dirty and dilapidated. They have come to labor more and more heavily under the costly burden of a huge administrative, nonmedical machinery. There has not been a medically qualified director of the Bronx Psychiatric Center, for example, for a decade; the present administration never visits the wards, has no experience, no idea, of the needs and realities of medical care.
And yet, precisely at this juncture, further cuts are being made. Massive lay-offs have been announced, not only in the huge, bureaucratic machinery, which is the real drain on state resources, but among the few physicians, therapists and treatment aides left. With this, the state hospitals will lose their last care-giving capacity and become little more than warehouses for the sick.
Outpatient clinics, the last resource for deinstitutionalized patients, are also being closed all over the country. For example, the huge crisis center at Mt. Zion Hospital in San Francisco, which looks after 10,000 patients a year, is scheduled to close next month. All psychiatric care in the U.S. is being dangerously cut back now.
There are 80,000 desperately ill and wretched people on our streets, not only homeless and endangered, and perhaps dangerous to others, but often in a nightmare of their own psychoses. These people need institutional care. We must not reduce the state hospitals to shadows of themselves, but restore and adapt them into streamlined, economically efficient strongholds of care. We need to restructure our state hospitals, not close them.


Mayor David Dinkins yesterday said of the Fernandez proposal, "It's a question of saving lives" -- words his appointees to the board should ponder before casting their votes. If only the Queens Borough President, Claire Shulman, were to speak with equal directness -- and be heard by her appointee. A nurse herself, Ms. Shulman should know better than most the importance of AIDS prevention, and the support given condom distribution plans by the nation's health professionals.
The Mayor wisely endorses the Chancellor's belief that parental consent should not be a requisite for students requesting condoms. Otherwise many of the students who most need protection might shy away from seeking it. But with those condoms will come counseling, instructions and referrals -- under the aegis of professionals, including those from the Board of Health and the Health and Hospitals Corporation.
The Board of Education has a choice tomorrow: whether to be swayed by those who mind our children's health or those who would mind their morals. May it cast its vote for health -- and life.
The commission claims the Dvorak House is a cultural and historic site worth saving, but it's hard to see why. Dvorak did live at 327 East 17th Street from 1892 to 1895, and wrote the "New World" Symphony there. But it's not as if people could visit the house and get a sense of how the composer lived. It's been changed radically inside and out.
The original stoop is gone. What was once the front door is now a kitchen window. A spiral staircase cuts the parlor floor in half and rooms have been partitioned and repartitioned.
The commission made the building a landmark not for its physical attributes but as a kind of historical memory bank. That raises the prospect of a city dotted with shrines because a celebrity passed through. New York City, which has always attracted the notable, cannot turn every site of sentimental interest into a landmark, protected from demolition and even most exterior changes.
This case is particularly troubling because it reeks of Nimby -- the destructive not-in-my-backyard phenomenon that so often blocks unpopular facilities. The local community board says it doesn't oppose an AIDS facility in principle, and some people propose putting the hospice a block away, in a building Beth Israel wants for other purposes. But hospital officials anticipate opposition to an AIDS facility there, too, and they're probably right.
The Landmarks Commission weakens its own authority when it makes frivolous decisions. The role the Dvorak House played in New York City history can be acknowledged with an appropriate and handsome plaque affixed to the wall of whatever structure ultimately occupies the site, and that is precisely what the City Council can conclude when it considers the landmark designation.
If their plight is appalling, so are the costs. California now spends $178 million a year to care for such babies; Maryland spends $121 million. By one estimate, medical treatment and foster care in the first five years would total $500 million for just 9,000 drug-damaged babies born in 1989. The cost of special education to prepare them for school triples the amount, to $1.5 billion.
Drug treatment for addicted pregnant women could prevent both the suffering and the costs. Recent studies confirm the effectiveness of residential treatment programs. Women enrolled during pregnancy are likely to remain drug-free -- thus sparing the damage to their child even if they eventually return to drug abuse. The programs could also provide counseling and education.
Despite the obvious need, Medicaid refuses to pay for residential drug treatment because it classifies substance abuse as a form of mental illness. Washington considers residential mental health programs a state responsibility.
But states are unlikely to meet drug-treatment needs of all pregnant addicts. And Washington remains obliged to finance the exorbitant medical and welfare costs of their babies. The practical argument for a pregnant-addict exemption to the Medicaid rule overwhelms the policy tradition.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York and Representative Dick Durbin of Illinois have introduced bills creating such an exemption. Mr. Durbin estimates the annual expense at $20 million in the first year; up to $200 million after five years. Considering how much cost -- and misery -- that could avert, it's a rare bargain.
Epidemiology is the inexact science of making correlations between disease and various factors that might have caused it. In the 1988 study that caused alarm, women who had been pregnant were asked to recall, years after the fact, what exposure they had had to various hazards, including video terminals. But that study had methodological weaknesses that made it difficult to determine whether the miscarriages resulted from factors like stress or uncomfortable seating that were unrelated to VDT radiation. It also suffered a weakness common to all such retrospective studies. The women who suffered miscarriages may have been more likely to recall their exposure to hazards than women with no reproductive problems.
The findings last week came from a Government study whose design appears stronger. It compared two groups of telephone operators whose characteristics and work practices were very similar, except for the use of VDT's. The study had better records of time spent in front of VDT's. And it measured the radiation emitted by the machines. It too was a retrospective study that relied on memories and had no way of catching early miscarriages of which the women were unaware. But most experts agree it is the strongest study to date.
Other studies are now following women from the onset of pregnancy to see what happens to them, thus eliminating the problem of fallible memories.
Epidemiology is most persuasive when an accumulation of studies all point in the same direction. It is seldom wise to rush to judgment based on a single study. No matter how reputable the researchers, the results could be faulty.
The new Norplant System appears to be remarkably effective and relatively free of side effects. Six tiny tubes of progestin are implanted under the skin of a woman's upper arm, and the hormone is then slowly released into the body over five years. But lack of information and money may keep poor women from taking advantage of it.
A Norplant implant costs $350 and involves several visits to a doctor's office. That's a lot less than it costs to take the pill for five years. Even so, it's an unattainable fortune for a woman who lives in poverty. That's why it's imperative that Norplant be covered by Medicaid.
Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, which markets Norplant and is training 8,000 physicians in its use, has filed applications with all the state Medicaid organizations. Twelve, among them New York's, have agreed to coverage, and several others are expected to. The remainder, some of which are balking at the cost, would be wise to do so.
The long-run savings for the Medicaid program -- in expenses for unintended pregnancies and state-funded abortions -- are obvious. But it is humanity, not economy, that should compel the states to help poor women obtain Norplant. Just as this country is trying to insure that all America's babies are born equal, so it should insure that all America's women have an equal chance to make reproductive choices.
Differences between the two make that move seem ill considered. Psychiatric Institute scientists do basic research, investigating biological sources of mental illness. Researchers at Nathan Kline consider practical questions of caring for the mentally ill.
Today Nathan Kline researchers study homelessness among the mentally ill, violence and mental illness, management of schizophrenia and treatment of Alzheimer's disease. Much of the research is financed with multi-year grants; closing down the institute would mean jettisoning work in progress and could damage the state's reputation with grant-makers.
Richard Surles, the State Commissioner of Mental Health, says that if $5 million could be found elsewhere in the budget, he might accept enough additional cuts to keep the institute going.
New York desperately needs to know more about managing mental patients, especially the homeless. Loss of so useful a research center for the sake of $5 million seems hard to justify even in a brutal budget year. A rescue effort deserves a prominent place on the Legislature's agenda.
State law requires all state-licensed mental hospitals, including those run by the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation, to prepare detailed plans for housing and other services to mental patients about to be discharged. The law also requires social service agencies to make sure the plans are carried out.
In response to lawsuits filed by former mental patients, Justice Lehner accepted the state's claim that it generally complies with the requirements. But he found that the city does not, and that many Hospital Corporation mental patients are, like John Heard, simply turned out into the streets or given directions to the nearest city shelter. Justice Lehner ordered parties to the suit to evaluate more rigorously patients facing discharge and provide more adequate housing.
Attorneys for the plaintiffs see a need for some 10,000 new beds in permanent residences. But city officials, their budgets sharply cut, are outraged. They quarrel with Justice Lehner's reading of the law and point out that long-term housing for the mentally ill is supposed to be a state responsibility.
Rather than allow the suit to lapse into a prolonged appeals battle over housing, however, the state and city could take a more constructive approach. The state now fields "intensive case managers" to keep track of discharged patients, helping them find housing, treatment for mental illness and other services. Early evaluations of the program suggest that the focused attention of case managers may be as important to stabilizing patients' lives as expansion of suitable housing.
Deploying more case managers could happen much faster than building thousands more residential spaces, especially if money is shifted from underutilized state psychiatric hospitals to help with city programs.
Besides, the housing need is already being addressed to some extent by the current construction of 5,225 spaces for the homeless mentally ill under terms of a city-state agreement signed last summer. Another 5,000 may well be needed, but their construction would take years even if the city dropped all appeals. More case managers could respond to Justice Lehner's concern immediately, and at far lower cost.
But doesn't a company have good cause to worry about worker health -- and the possibility of civil liability if a worker's offspring turn out to be deformed or disabled? Justice Harry Blackmun, writing for the Court, found no conflict between job equality and corporate conscience. He went out of his way to signal that a company wouldn't suffer if it warned all employees of health risks and observed safety standards while obeying the Federal civil rights laws.
Justice Blackmun added, tellingly: "Decisions about the welfare of future children must be left to the parents who conceive, bear, support and raise them rather than to the employers who hire those parents." That notion that choice rests with the worker, women as well as men, is a major consequence of Congress's decision to outlaw sex discrimination in employment.
The decision is especially welcome because the high court, even in a more liberal climate, hasn't been swift about identifying sex discrimination. It took a century to apply the 14th Amendment to strike down a state law favoring men over equally qualified women for a job. In 1976 the Court couldn't see the bias in disability plans that excluded pregnancy. Congress promptly responded with an amendment to the civil rights law that the Court has now enforced in the Johnson Controls case.
All nine justices recognized that the company's particular fetal protection policy was excessive. The company regarded all female employees as potential mothers unless they produced medical evidence of sterility. It barred women even from the promotion ladder to jobs with exposure to lead. And it ignored evidence of similar lead-exposure hazards for male workers.
Still more gratifying was the majority of five, including the newest justice, David Souter, which recognized that Federal law bans not just excessive policies but virtually all sex-specific exclusions, however shrouded with refinements. That avoids a lot of pointless litigation.
Finally, the decision is a welcome antidote to half a dozen recent rulings that badly misinterpreted job discrimination law -- so badly that civil rights groups and the Bush Administration agree that most of those decisions need correction by Congress. On Wednesday the Court squarely identified a subtle form of bias on the job and was true to the law's intent to get it out of the workplace.
To get a juicy burger with less fat, Auburn University researchers substituted water for some fat. The product uses a seaweed extract to bind more water into the meat. That may sound less appetizing than "100 percent pure beef." Yet, in a taste test, McDonald's executives are said to have preferred the McLean to the regular patty.
America is a burger-loving nation; ground beef is the food that contributes the most fat to the American diet. If McDonald's succeeds in popularizing its lower-fat alternative, it could be a healthy breakthrough.
In this kind of paper war, doctors lose, patients lose and people who pay insurance premiums lose. But there are some obvious and sensible reforms that Government, the states, insurers and practitioners could undertake, to everyone's advantage.
Horror stories abound. The American Society of Internal Medicine recently reported the case of "Mary," 83 years old, a Colorado Medicare patient.  Erroneously listed as dead, she saw her Medicare payments halted even after investigators visited both her and her doctor. The paper trail eventually totaled hundreds of pages.
Patients complain that their doctors hustle them through appointments. Many doctors agree. But what, they ask, are they supposed to do to make up for the time they spend fighting paper battles with insurance companies and government agencies? Doctors describe even worse battles with the review boards that sometimes challenge their intended treatments or second-guess them at billing time.
There's probably no certain remedy as long as American medical insurance remains a government-private patchwork. But that doesn't excuse any insurers, government or private, from simplifying and reducing the red tape burden.
Congress took a stab at the problem last fall with a new law requiring doctors' offices to fill out all Medicare claims. Last month the Department of Health and Human Services announced the appointment of eight private doctors to review the agency's paper demands. The Times recently reported on another promising reform under way in several states -- reducing the red tape generated by marginal or incompetent medical oversight committees. Most government health programs are run by the states and it's at that level that most of the glitches occur.
Better-trained personnel would help cut red tape. So would doctor-patient advisory councils. Cutting secrecy would help, since government and private insurers often fog over just what they are willing to pay for. Doctors and patients need far more clarity on how claims are decided.
American health care is choking on all the forms. Peeling away the red tape would bring better medicine at lower cost.
Congress's response, and that of several Republican senators in particular, was a loud no. Mr. Bush, it said, was "robbing Peter to pay Paul" and "pitting rural babies against urban babies." Congress prohibited the shift in funds, and then added $25 million to the infant mortality campaign in the current fiscal year.
That $25 million, which apparently will not require cuts in other domestic programs to meet budget ceilings, is $32 million shy of the $57 million that Mr. Bush hoped to put into his new initiative. But it's new money, not diverted money. While the President may have shown a commendable concern, Congress showed the greater common sense.
"She came, she came!" shouted the child the next morning, waving the coin. "The Tooth Fairy came! I saw her! She was dressed in pink with big purple lace wings."
Her parents had forgotten: What the Tooth Fairy is all about is not money but magic.
Which is why I understand both sides of the daiquiri story.
The daiquiri story took place in a restaurant just outside Seattle. Two waiters were fired after they tried to dissuade a pregnant woman from ordering a drink. The assistant manager said that it was not their job to harangue customers about their health habits.
Obviously the manager was not among the Physically Correct.
Many of us have been reprimanded by the Physically Correct, and have been Physically Correct ourselves.  For every time you stood in the bank line and conspicuously waved away cigarette smoke as though it was mustard gas, there was the time that someone peered at your tan and with pursed lips said, "Melanoma."
There are several reasons why people insist on being Physically Correct, or Ph.C. One is that they consider themselves harmed by your bad behavior, by Nutrasweet in the punch and M.S.G. in the stir-fry. They know you'll appreciate their superior knowledge and vast concern. They are wrong. The issue of secondhand smoke has busted up many a friendship.
Another is that they believe they are looking out for innocent victims.  This is why the fetus police feel so confident in their constant efforts to inform pregnant women of their shortcomings.
But it's also because the words "I told you so" comprise one of the most satisfying sentences in the English language.
The daiquiri story came close on the heels of the Supreme Court decision in the Johnson Controls case. That was the case in which all women capable of having children were barred from many jobs at a factory that makes batteries because of the possible effects of lead contamination on unborn children. On the one hand, lead is a hazard to the fetus. On the other hand, women were either having their tubes tied or winding up on the low end of the pay scale.
The Court ruled that if a woman can do the job, she can have the job, fertile or not. "Decisions about the welfare of future children must be left to the parents," wrote Justice Blackmun for the majority. I think the call was clearly the right one, but, like the daiquiri episode, I can see both sides.
(I also see contradictions in both cases. If lead is so damaging, what about the rights of men not to be exposed to it? Isn't the overall safety of the workplace the real issue here?  And what about the woman told she shouldn't drink during pregnancy?  She lives in a society that thinks of crack as a drug and alcohol as an amusing little accompaniment to a chicken fricassee.)
What it all comes down to is the question of who decides. Fetal protection policies assume that women won't be as vigilant protecting themselves and their own as the company will be protecting its deep pocket.  And the waiters assumed that they knew better than their customer the perils of drinking during pregnancy.
It so happens that the customer was a week past her due date and that she says she had been very careful throughout her pregnancy. This is a different scenario than the one that envisions a pregnant woman who is tanked up all the time, and different scenarios are what individual rights are all about.
The irritating thing about the Ph.C. is that they're almost always C. No one should ever smoke. Tanning is bad for your skin. Pregnant women who drink risk damaging their children. What's also true is that most people know those things already.
Freedom's just another word for being able to act stupid if you want to. I'm uncomfortable enough with elected officials telling people how to behave in their private lives, and I hated it when the fetus police took upon themselves a role that rightly belonged to me, my husband and my doctor. I think waiters should assume that the kind of advice most customers need is whether to order the stroganoff or not, and that certain life decisions are personal property. Even when those decisions are wrong.
PUBLIC & PRIVATE
Mayor Dinkins also wrote to the president of Roussel-Uclaf , the pharmaceutical company that developed RU-486 but has so far been unwilling to brave the boos and possible boycotts of anti-abortion activists. "The rules of medicine, morality and the marketplace," he wrote, "dictate that all women who choose to have abortions
should
have access to the safest, most effective and least expensive methods available." With good reason, he asked that RU-486, which also has enormous potential for treating breast cancer, brain cancer and endometriosis, be made available for testing by a drug company in the United States.
Getting RU-486 tested and distributed in the United States will take leadership -- and a determination to be deaf to those lonely hecklers. In launching this campaign, David Dinkins is displaying both.
There is a better way, and several states, including New York, are giving it serious consideration. It is called
managed Medicaid,
a way of providing medical care to the poor that restores dignity and common sense. A blue-ribbon committee now urges Mayor David Dinkins of New York to embrace managed Medicaid. The case is compelling, for the physical health of poor patients and also the fiscal health of the city and state.
Under the present system, poor people who receive often inadequate Medicaid insurance seek care wherever they can find it, often at an emergency room. Under managed Medicaid they would choose from a new network of medical care facilities and receive their care in that place. That would allow them to develop a relationship with one doctor and get preventive, continuing attention. Typically, these facilities would resemble health maintenance organizations, or H.M.O.'s, which increasingly attract privately insured people.
Because enrollment would be mandatory, a managed system has a good chance of overcoming a besetting problem: the lack of doctors willing to serve poor patients in poor areas. How to attract the doctors? By paying higher reimbursement rates and guaranteeing them a large pool of patients. The state could afford the higher rates and still save money because preventive medical attention would obviate much more expensive care.
Advocates predict that a managed system could attract private doctors, H.M.O.'s and hospitals now struggling to serve Medicaid patients inefficiently in costly emergency rooms meant to cope with true emergencies.
There are obstacles to managed Medicaid. It would, notably, require capital to establish the new neighborhood facilities. But the chief stumbling block is emotional -- overcoming the perception that a managed system denies poor people the freedom of choice available to others. Patients would have to choose and stay with one facility. But compare that with the only practical present choice -- ping-ponging from sullen service in one place to the same in another.
It will take time to put a managed system into practice, but New York is on the verge of taking the first step. Gov. Mario Cuomo has introduced a bill to require counties to set up managed Medicaid systems gradually. Now Mayor Dinkins's management advisory committee urges him to go ahead with a pilot project. Concern for the poor, and for prudent management, would impel him to say yes, and soon.
The current system is close to disaster. It accounts for about 14 percent of the state budget and nearly 7 percent of New York City's budget, and it keeps growing. A managed system would save money -- the costs average at least 10 percent less than traditional Medicaid. More important, it can bring humanity and quality care to poor New Yorkers; they already suffer enough.
Instead of sacrificing science for politics, public officials should follow the lead of Mayor David N. Dinkins of New York City who last week called on 33 of the nation's big-city mayors to support having RU-486 tested in this country.
Before RU-486 became an abortion bugaboo, nonabortion research with the drug had been going on for more than a decade. But by late 1988, anti-abortion activists were papering the Food and Drug Administration with claims that RU-486 was unsafe.
In June 1989, a month after 11 members of Congress urged the F.D.A. commissioner to bar the drug's entry for personal use, the agency responded with an "import alert." This seldom used action directs the agency to search for personal quantities of the drug at points of entry to the U.S. An alert is adopted almost always after the F.D.A. finds a dangerous drug is being secretly imported into the U.S. However, in the case of RU-486, the agency acted without evidence that the drug was being brought into the country.
Last fall, medical researchers told Congress that the import alert was bad news for science. Dr. Kathryn Horwitz, a cancer researcher at the University of Colorado, testified that she could "no longer get RU-486 for testing in a basic experimental sense" and "that thousands of men and women are denied access to a safe and critically important drug."
In addition, officials at the National Institutes of Health claimed last November that they could not obtain enough of the drug to continue human trials for Cushing's disease.
This week, Dr. Etienne-Emile Baulieu, the French inventor of the drug, told a scientific conference in Paris that RU-486 could be 95 percent effective for abortions if used in combination with another drug, Cytotec. Will Cytotec, approved in the U.S. for treatment of ulcers, be the anti-abortion movement's next target?
The import alert is not required by any statute: it is discretionary. Unless it can prove that RU-486 is being illegally imported, the Administration should rescind the import alert. Otherwise, Congress should pass legislation lifting the alert.
Roussel Uclaf, the French company that makes RU-486, has been reluctant to introduce the drug in the U.S. for fear of boycotts from anti-abortion activists. The U.S. should inform the company that RU-486 will receive a fair hearing from the F.D.A. It should also encourage nonabortion research with RU-486.
For the U.S. to stand for freedom from disease and unfettered scientific research, RU-486 should no longer be treated as a political football.
Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, is a member of the House subcommittee on Health and Environment.
It is if you're young enough to be living, or have children living, within the next 50 years. The new calculations mean that in the coming half-century, about 12 million Americans will contract skin cancer and probably 200,000 will die -- nearly 20 times as many as formerly predicted.
Before the new findings, only a half-million additional cases of skin cancer and just over 9,000 deaths were expected from ozone depletion.  Currently, there are only about 8,000 deaths a year from skin cancer.
But even with such rapidly worsening odds, what's the ozone layer got to do with you?
Plenty, if you're one of the tens of millions of Americans with a refrigerator or an air-conditioner, or both, in your house, or an air-conditioner in your car. In most of these machines, chlorofluorocarbons -- CFC's, for short -- are the heat-transfer agent that provides the cooling effect.
Unfortunately, they're also the most prominent of the chemicals that, as they escape into the atmosphere, eat away at the ozone layer.  And it's the ozone layer that protects the earth and its inhabitants from too much of the sun's ultraviolet light, a prime cause of skin cancer.
The less ozone, the more ultraviolet, at a rate of about 2 percent more ultraviolet for every 1 percent loss of ozone. Ample evidence suggests that that means more skin cancer, more eye cataracts, more damage to the human immune system and to crops, plants and the oceanic food chain.
The new measurements, recorded over a period of 11 years by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, allow for changes caused by the solar cycle. They still identified an ozone loss of about 4.5 to 5 percent over the U.S. in the last decade; previous, less reliable findings had suggested no more than a 2 percent loss from 1969 to 1986.
Even on the earlier, less alarming data, most of the world had committed itself to phasing out CFC's. In 1987, 57 nations meeting in Montreal adopted a treaty calling for a 50 percent cut in production of CFC's and other ozone-attacking chemicals.  Last June, in London, most governments agreed that by the end of this century in developed countries, and by 2010 elsewhere, CFC production would be halted entirely.
Even the United States, which has not taken a strong lead against international environmental threats, was ready to move by the time of the London conference. President Bush, on the advice of his chief of staff, John Sununu, had been refusing to contribute a previously pledged $25 million to a fund to help poor countries substitute "ozone-friendly" -- but more expensive -- chemicals for CFC's.  Last year Mr. Bush overruled Mr. Sununu and put up the $25 million.
But that was last year, and the new NASA measurements call all former assumptions into doubt. "In the next couple of decades, the level of ozone depletion could border on the disastrous," in the opinion of Dr. Michael Oppenheimer of the Environmental Defense Fund. The bad news, he said, "underscores the need to avoid taking risks with global life support systems like the ozone layer and also like the world's climate."
In fact, the "stunning" new information, said William K. Reilly, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, means steps already taken to protect the ozone layer "may well turn out to be inadequate."
He may have a hard time convincing the Bush Administration, which responded to the drastically increased rate of ozone depletion with its accustomed ho-hum -- this time from Michael Deland, the chairman of the President's Council on Environmental Quality: "I think that before we undertake a major overhaul of U.S. or worldwide policies, we need to very carefully scrutinize this and other reports to evaluate the accuracy in a deliberative and comprehensive scientific way."
How's that for gobbledygook? But what else would you expect from an Administration that thinks it need do nothing but study global warming, while carbon dioxide in the atmosphere continues to increase?
Two-thirds of the elderly buy at least one Medigap policy, often paying for benefits they cannot use. One-third desperately buy 2, 3 or even 15 separate Medigap policies -- a duplication that adds no protection, but unconscionable costs.
Last fall Congress passed a law to forbid the sale of a second Medigap policy to a person who does not declare an intention to drop the first policy. The law also called for creation of a limited number of standard policies to replace the thousands now available.
This week the insurance commissioners announced nine standard policies. Each covers basic benefits. The policies differ according to whether they cover items like hospital deductibles, prescription drugs and physician fees that exceed Medicare's limits. Insurers will not be allowed to offer any other Medigap policy. This restriction might overly stifle innovation in a changing market. Congress might better have waited to see whether new counseling services at Social Security offices eliminated the confusion.
Nevertheless, radical simplification of Medigap insurance is a triumph for the elderly. With attention focused on a small number of responsible options, carriers will be forced to offer competitive prices. That way the elderly will be spared financial ruin caused either by illness or insurance.
To that end, Dr. Sullivan asked that fans boycott sports events backed by tobacco companies and that sports promoters shun tobacco sponsorship. A spokesman for one tobacco company promptly replied that "we have a right to sell our products and a right to call attention to them." And the tennis player Pam Shriver, citing the growth of the women's tour and the opportunities that are provided by Philip Morris, which sponsors the Virginia Slims tournaments, commented, "It's not that easy."
It probably isn't, but neither is lung cancer. What athletes celebrate -- life at its fittest -- is, in fact, the reverse of what is represented by a cigarette. Whether or not they support Dr. Sullivan's suggested boycott, may every fan remember that the next time someone like Gabriela Sabatini or Steffi Graf takes the court.
That happened when the F.D.A. refused to approve the Warner-Lambert Company's tacrine, the first drug to alleviate Alzheimer's by slightly improving patients' memory. No one touted it as a cure. The F.D.A. said it was bothered by the drug's side effects, notably liver damage, and by doubt about how much memory it actually restored. Instead of allowing nationwide distribution, the F.D.A. suggested that tacrine be dispensed on a research basis through selected doctors. The doctors would report the results to Washington.
The turndown drew a howl from the families of Alzheimer's patients; they argued that any advance for a terminal disease, no matter how small, should be made available immediately. But Federal approval of a new drug requires a careful weighing of risks and benefits. In the case of tacrine, the agency has concluded that the possible but uncertain gain in memory still seems too meager to offset potential damage to the liver.
Approving distribution only to find out later that tacrine is useless, even dangerous, could turn into a billion-dollar mistake. Medicare costs for the drug would be enormous. And a mistake with tacrine could make everyone more skittish about other drugs under development.
Warner-Lambert is giving the Government further data. But if the F.D.A. remains uncertain, it should press for still more research promptly. The victims and their families deserve an answer; what is needed now is prudent haste.
The high court itself has allowed a so-called "good faith" exception whereby evidence seized under a technically faulty search warrant might be used at trial because police or agents honestly believed the warrant was valid. That emboldened the Justice Department to argue for a similar exception where an officer doesn't even try to get a warrant -- a request that the courts and Congress have not yet granted.
Now the department proposes in its crime bill a "firearms" exception. It would let illegally seized weapons be used in Federal trials for violent or serious drug crimes, even if the officers hadn't a scintilla of good-faith belief in the legality of their gun seizures. Attorney General Dick Thornburgh calls it a firearms "inclusionary" rule. A better name would be a "bad-faith exception" to the exclusionary rule.
Mr. Thornburgh argues that the bill provides a strong deterrent against misconduct by Federal agents in the form of a new Justice Department review board -- operating under regulations Mr. Thornburgh would write -- that supposedly would discipline errant agents. He suggests, in fact, that such a disciplinary board is more apt to deter agents' wrongdoing than is an exclusionary rule that simply excludes the fruits of illegal searches without disciplining the agents responsible.
But it's fallacious that a new, untried Justice Department bureaucracy is a substitute for the exclusionary rule's deterrent effect against unlawful entries, searches and seizures. Rare indeed is any instance of official discipline against an officer whose illegal activity solved a crime.
The exclusionary rule has proved its value over the years. By enforcing the Fourth Amendment's requirement for searches based not on an officer's whim but rather on objective reasons and evidence of suspected criminality, the rule has elevated police conduct over the generations.
Yes, the rule has sometimes spared a criminal caught through tainted evidence. But more important, it has safeguarded law-abiding citizens from overreaching police authority. Congress need not carve out any more exceptions, and certainly not for bad-faith searches, to this salutary rule.
In an effort to head off further legislation, Agriculture now proposes that all processed meat and poultry products carry labels listing calories, total fat, saturated fat, sodium and cholesterol. But the proposal doesn't rule out basing the calculations on an unrealistically small serving size, thus perversely encouraging the consumption of fatty foods.  Nutritional claims like "low-fat" or "low-cholesterol" might also be based on the puny servings. By contrast, products under the F.D.A.'s jurisdiction are required to use serving sizes based on amounts customarily consumed.
Further, meat products that can't qualify for even the diluted "low-fat" definition would be permitted to use similar-sounding terms like "lower-fat" that are destined to mislead, and labeling of fresh meat and poultry packaged in the supermarket would remain voluntary.
The Agriculture plan is so weak it now challenges the House and Senate to require complete and consistent labeling of all foods in the market.
The archaic regulations enrich 45,000 "farmers" who inherited or bought production licenses, most of which were issued during the Depression. Half of the current owners aren't poor farmers eking out subsistence from unforgiving land. They are absentee landlords renting their licenses for exorbitant fees.
This is a problem with a simple solution. The President could suspend the import ban, as the U.S. International Trade Commission recently recommended, allowing U.S. food processors to buy peanuts at low international prices. That would help millions of U.S. consumers. It would also help poor peanut growers in third world countries like Senegal and Ghana to earn a decent living. And it would let the Agriculture Department restore peanut butter to the lunch tables of schoolchildren.
An occasional glass of wine or beer is harmless, some researchers say, but no safe level of drinking during pregnancy has been established. In 1981, the U.S. Surgeon General recommended that women refrain from consuming any alcohol during pregnancy. In 1989, Congress required that all alcoholic beverages carry the warning.
Proponents of the warning posters probably exaggerate their effectiveness in reaching problem drinkers. But the state chapter of the National Organization for Women unreasonably portrays the signs as sexist, because they are aimed at women but not men, and as an indirect attack on abortion rights, because they focus on the health of the fetus rather than the woman's right to determine her own conduct. In truth, the scientific evidence linking birth defects to sperm damage caused by alcohol drinking in men is comparatively sketchy. And the law isn't a prohibition on women's conduct.
Those who favor a woman's right to choose should not deny women information that might help them make an informed choice about drinking during pregnancy.
TOPICS OF THE TIMES
McDonald's is hardly the only offender. Misleading percentage claims are a marketing ploy for fat-laden products ranging from frozen sausages and french fries to ice cream. The F.D.A. could help consumers by immediately calling for a moratorium on such claims, even while the agency prepares new restrictions to carry out last year's Federal nutrition labeling reform.
But that won't end the problem. Last year's labeling law doesn't cover meat and poultry products, which are regulated by the Agriculture Department. Agriculture shows little concern with percentage fat-free claims. The solution is for Congress to extend the benefits of more honest labeling to meat and poultry. In the meantime, there's no reason the Federal Trade Commission couldn't fill the void by cracking down on the use of misleading fat-free claims in advertising.
I happen to have had a direct influence on Federal research policy on the possible relationship between diet and breast cancer when I was staff director of the Senate Select Committee on Nutrition almost two decades ago. Hearings on the relationship between diet and chronic diseases, including breast cancer, ultimately led to the Federal adoption of dietary goals.
The goals were accepted after considerable opposition in the Government to changing research priorities to account for the key role that nutrition and diet play in the long development of disease. One of the most recalcitrant agencies was the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health.
The latest evidence of this recalcitrance was, oddly, the proud publication this month in the cancer institute's journal that rats fed high-fiber diets developed a lot fewer breast tumors than rats that ate no fiber. Unfortunately, this study only demonstrates that the institute seems more interested in studying rats than in living, breathing women.
But there was cause for optimism last week when the new N.I.H. director, Bernadine Healy, announced a bold $500 million initiative to study women's health. Research on the link between diet and breast cancer should be a top priority.
Despite efforts by scientists and women's groups over the years to get the National Cancer Institute to do a large study on diet and breast cancer -- comparable to what the National Heart Institute has done on men and coronary artery disease -- the institute has refused to do so. The most egregious refusal occurred a few months ago after a Senate committee instructed the institute "to cooperatively and aggressively move forward" with a study conducted on women.
"The Committee is disturbed to learn that more emphasis is not being placed on prevention and education programs within the N.C.I.," the Senate committee said.
The institute's scientists and the head of prevention programs approved the idea for a large study and presented it to the institute's advisory board, which is dominated by laboratory scientists primarily interested in basic, not applied, research. The board rejected the recommendation on the grounds that the study would cost too much, take too long and might not be worth it. (No one raised these objections when the issue was studying heart disease in men.) Instead, the board approved minimal start-up expenses with no commitment to a large study.
The N.I.H. should direct the cancer institute to go ahead with this study. If it does, maybe a decade from now, we will have the answers we need for our mothers, daughters, sisters and wives, not just for the rats.
Ken Schlossberg is a nutrition policy consultant.
Ideally, the Federal Government should pay all the costs of helping the poor, thus spreading the burden over all Americans. But short of that radical reform, the least Congress can do is insulate state and city budgets from additional poorhouse costs. In brief: Keep the mandates, but pay for them with higher Federal taxes.
Medicaid was created in 1965 primarily to provide medical insurance to families eligible for Aid to Families with Dependent Children, the Federal-state welfare program for single parents with dependent children. But A.F.D.C. excludes many families below the Federal poverty line. In recent years Congress has required states to extend Medicaid coverage to parents leaving A.F.D.C. for jobs and to poor elderly people unable to pay for nursing home and other medical costs not covered by Medicare. And last year, Congress mandated that states phase in Medicaid coverage for all children living below the poverty line.
The annual bill for the new mandates already exceeds $2 billion. At a time when states are slashing expenditures and boosting taxes by more than $10 billion, the impact is punishing. Combined with higher fees for medical services, Medicaid costs in 1995 are expected to rise to about $70 billion, more than double the 1990 total.
Asking cities and states to pay even half the additional cost creates pernicious consequences. They will be tempted to restrict services, hoping the poor will move elsewhere. And cities that offer generous services will be forced to jack up local taxes, fueling the flight of middle and upper income families to less generous jurisdictions.
In large part, poor children without Medicaid coverage will nevertheless be treated, usually in emergency rooms, at huge cost to taxpayers and -- as hospitals pass along the costs to their other patients -- private insurers. By picking up the tab for new Medicaid mandates, Congress would be shifting taxes, not raising them. States, already under siege by angry taxpayers, would be impelled to hold down local taxes by a like amount.
Shifting from state to Federal taxes won't halt skyrocketing Medicaid costs; that requires stringent new cost controls. But the shift would spread the Medicaid burden over all taxpayers, where it belongs, and away from those who happen to have poor neighbors.
Instead Judge Reichbach offered them AIDS counseling, blood tests and condoms.
I was once accused of making prostitutes seem Damon Runyonesque because I wrote a story suggesting that they had hopes and dreams, and that their behavior owed something to the laws of supply and demand. But whether we are willing to see them as human beings or not, the failures in the way the system treats them are emblematic of the way we treat other problems.
Fast and feckless. No thought of root causes or the big picture. And a contempt for the people involved that lends no urgency to the search for solutions. This is how we have often treated the poor and the homeless.  This is especially true of how we have treated prostitutes. There was no vested interest in being innovative -- until now.
Dr. Joyce Wallace, the president of the Foundation for Research on Sexually Transmitted Diseases, who set up the information desk in Judge Reichbach's courtroom and has since been asked to do the same for other judges, has been studying streetwalkers and AIDS. A third of the women she's tested for her study are HIV infected. It's a powerful argument for getting women off the streets.
The question is how to do that. The wise-guy smart-mouth answer is to inhibit street prostitution by arresting the customers. If word got out that the men might spend 24 hours in the holding pen ("Hello, honey?  Yeah, this meeting is running kind of long. . . .") it could have a chilling effect. But those of us who remember the uproar when the Koch administration ordered WNYC to broadcast the names of johns know that this is not going to happen.
Perhaps the real key lies in Dr. Wallace's other findings. A quarter of the women she studied were living on the streets, in parks or subways.  Many had a drug habit. Almost 85 percent had children, but only 10 percent of the children lived with their mothers. ("Children?" someone once said when I was talking about some of the women who worked on 11th Avenue. "They have children?")
So an AIDS information desk and a handful of condoms are, at best, half measures. Dr. Wallace herself hopes to outfit a special bus to cruise the city, providing medical screening, housing and drug rehabilitation program referrals, showers, food and condoms to drug-addicted prostitutes in the areas where they work.
Dr. Wallace's research makes clear that prostitution is not the primary issue for many of these women, or, by extension, for the neighborhoods that understandably hate the sight of them climbing into cars or flashing customers. Her study concludes, "Most of them would support themselves in another way if they had adequate skills to do so." Or, as one woman who works beneath the Williamsburg Bridge said last week, "What else I got to sell?"
Judge Reichbach did a smart and humane thing. While some prostitutes use condoms, the desperate women who trawl the areas outside tunnels and beneath elevated highways will often spend their money on crack instead. Maybe the judge will save someone from HIV-exposure. At the very least, one woman told him that he made her feel like a human being. It could save lives, their own and those of their customers, to help these women stay clean and sober, to give them a place to live, to teach them to earn the rent some other way, at the very least to urge them to use protection. In the process, someone might make them feel human, which seems like a good thing to me.
The new pyramid chart, announced with great fanfare by department officials just two weeks ago, was awaiting final proofreading at the printer when it was pulled. Its recommended servings per day for each of the four food groups vary little from those used on the old food-wheel pie chart. At issue is the way that advice is depicted. On the wheel, each of the food groups occupies a similarly sized section, giving meat and dairy products pictorial emphasis far beyond their modest proportions in recommended diets. The pyramid design was intended to reflect more accurately the recommended daily consumption, through the amount of space allotted to a food group and its location in the pyramid. Food groups close to the broad base of the pyramid warrant the biggest proportions of a healthy diet.
The meat and dairy industries complained loudly to Mr. Madigan that their place on the pyramid, right under unhealthful fats and oils, could discourage consumption of their products. But the new graphic is just a better way to convey familiar advice: eating right means fewer servings of meat and dairy products than of grains, fruits and vegetables.
Mr. Madigan denies that he bowed to pressure. The pyramid, explains a spokesman, has not yet been tested on children. But the lesson for Congress is plain: Conflicting loyalties make Agriculture the wrong agency to conduct the nation's nutrition education program.
Health delivery problems are not a matter of too little spending. The U.S. spends more on health care than any other industrialized nation, yet costs are rising at an alarming 20 percent a year. For workers fortunate enough to have employer-provided coverage, the system provides technological wizardry on demand for those able to pay. But higher premiums mean lower wages. And 13 percent of Americans have no insurance, while millions more have inadequate coverage.
As The Times's five-part series that concludes today shows, the system victimizes large classes of citizens. Workers with medical problems are trapped in their current jobs, fearing they've become uninsurable anywhere else. Employees in small businesses often receive no coverage at work and cannot afford coverage on their own. And all but the wealthiest families face financial ruin if a disabled parent or child requires long-term care.
There are no easy solutions. But a Bush initiative could focus on these essentials:
Universal Coverage:
All Americans must be covered by basic insurance at a price they can afford. Mr. Bush and Congress shrink from the costs of subsidizing insurance for the poor. But much of the presumed extra cost is an optical illusion. Without insurance, the poor are treated in expensive hospital emergency rooms -- a huge cost that hospitals pass on to private patients and taxpayers. With insurance, the poor would get low-cost help from a local doctor or clinic.
Cost Containment:
Doctors, hospitals, clinics and, yes, patients must have incentives to cut costs. At a minimum that means forcing individuals to pay for part of their medical costs, giving them the incentive to make prudent decisions.
Backup Insurance:
No matter how the system is reformed, some individuals will not find affordable private insurance. So the Federal or state governments will have to guarantee carriers that will take all comers at an affordable price.
Managed Care:
Many experts believe that costs can't be contained unless sponsors -- like large employers or government agencies -- negotiate with insurers on behalf of large numbers of individuals over prices, enrollment and treatment. That would rein in excessive testing and high-tech treatment -- a powerful brake on runaway costs.
Unless the reform process begins in public and with vigor, medical insurance will be as haphazard, chaotic and cruel at the end of the Bush Administration as it is now. The problem needs bold leadership. This is not a time for the President to cower.
The father of Federalism chose to accept the opprobrium of his attempted cover-up of an adultery scandal rather than let it be thought he had abused the public trust at Treasury. His morals in private life were questionable but his ethics in public life were impeccable. The citizens of the new nation agreed with those priorities, and Hamilton's career was saved.
The grand tradition marches on. Americans are being presented again with a brouhaha about private morality and a concern with public ethics.
Senator Charles Robb of Virginia stands accused by NBC News of having attended parties at which a former used-car salesman claims cocaine was used (a charge already heard and shrugged off by Virginia voters), and -- new and titillating -- for having taken at least a massage in 1984 from a former Miss Virginia.
The woman gaining celebrity by claiming seven years afterward to have had a gubernatorial affair is the sort who carries a concealed tape recorder into meetings, then makes her eavesdropping on a dopey Robb aide available for audio enhancement and national dissemination.
Will this outdated gossip ruin Senator Robb's chances for a run for the White House? I think not; even if he did absent himself from fidelity with Miss Virginia, voters will see that as a private moral matter.
Ah, but what of the Character Issue? Would we want as our leader one who has sinned while professing to be pure? It's not the morality but the hypocrisy, say the moralizers.
That's like a headline-hunting prosecutor who cannot prove a crime seeking an indictment for conspiracy to commit one. "Character Issue" is a euphemism used by those not honest enough to admit to peephole interest; it's a hypocritical charge of hypocrisy, a powdering of the bluenose.
Such shockability has destroyed candidacies in the recent past; in that regard, it was good to see Gary Hart testifying this week to House Armed Services about the success of maneuverability in Desert Storm, an area of military reform in which he was a leader for a decade. The media's justification of their stakeout of his bedroom was akin to a rapist's discredited defense: "He asked for it."
The morally upright John Sununu's sin, on the other hand, is the hubris that leads to ethical blindness.
Some brilliant but shallow minds, thrust into positions of power, assume they can do no wrong in the pursuit of right. Whipsawed by great power and little money, they feel like impoverished billionaires, and use power to order up the luxuries that others use money to buy.
So he paid only $1,200 for trips that cost taxpayers a half-million dollars plus crew salaries, on the arrogant notion that the President would be helpless if denied "secure voice contact" with his indispensable chief of staff winging to the ski slopes. (If the missiles are coming in, no secure line is needed to shout "Retaliate!")
That pompous excuse for a plush ride is a thumb in the eye to every taxpayer -- and in the case of an ostentatious cost-cutter, genuine hypocrisy. Led by U.S. News's Friday night release, the media did not expose merely "the appearance of impropriety," as Mr. Bush extenuates it, but a real ethical transgression.
Using national security as a cover for personal luxury is not wrong because it appears wrong, but because it
is
wrong. Secretly padding the paycheck with perks may not be unlawful, but it is surely unethical. Our palindromic pal is not being punished for being this Administration's Abominable No-Man, but for stirring the public's unerring sense of sleaze.
Hamilton's supporters later tried to get even with Jefferson by exhuming stories of an adulterous past. Old Tom survived that blast at immorality in his private affairs; then as now, it's unethical conduct in public affairs that troubles the voters.
At least that's the view of the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, a nonprofit group active in health policy. It is asking Agriculture to change the four basic food groups to a new quartet -- fruits, vegetables, grains and legumes. Forget meat and dairy: The typical Western diet, the doctors say, is associated with just about every known ill. Ergo, we should all switch to a plant-based diet and learn to love legumes. Which, actually, those of us who are admirers of Skippy, Jif and Peter Pan do already. Yes, peanuts are legumes, along with beans and soybeans.
The committee's director, Dr. Neal Barnard, thinks it will take until the year 2025 before the Federal Government accepts the proposal. Learning to love soy milk may take even longer.
Even so, 22 states now include Clozapine and the monitoring in the list of pharmaceuticals whose costs are reimbursable under the state-Federal Medicaid program of health insurance for the poor.
Three mental patients recently sued New York State demanding Medicaid payment for Clozapine, and won a favorable decision from a State Supreme Court justice. There may be grounds for appeal, but the issue is one of policy more than law. Should an administration under heavy fiscal pressure fight the order to avoid its cost?
No. For one thing, only a few thousand New York Medicaid patients would benefit from the drug, at a cost of $7.5 million annually -- even less if New York and a number of other states succeed with an antitrust suit against Sandoz. And the expense might soon be offset by savings. New York pays more than $90,000 a year to treat a schizophrenic in a state hospital; next to that, even the inflated Clozapine price looks like a bargain. And the drug could help patients live more independently, thereby easing the burden on public agencies.
The most compelling argument is moral. Clozapine could dramatically relieve the suffering of the state's most tormented mental patients. And it could help remove hundreds from the streets in a humane way. It would be inconceivable for the state to block an effective new drug for heart disease or cancer for fiscal reasons. Why hesitate over a drug for devastating mental illness?
New York does have a problem with its growing Medicaid budget, but the forces driving it are the gross inefficiencies of health care delivery in poor urban areas and increasing claims for nursing home care. Compared with those costs, Clozapine is a marginal issue. And the benefits it offers mental patients and their families are priceless.
Insisting that new medical devices, drugs and procedures be cost-effective from the start is a dangerous approach. If handled clumsily, it runs the risk of chilling promising research. Once Medicare begins to balk at paying for something new, private insurers will not be far behind. And without a market for new technologies, small health-care companies in particular are likely to have difficulty raising venture capital to develop and sell new devices.
Up to now, once a new technique or drug or piece of machinery was proven safe and effective, Medicare weighed its decision to pay against a simple criterion: Is the equipment's use reasonable and necessary for the treatment proposed? Dollars didn't count.
There was an occasional bump -- not everyone could agree on what was "reasonable," and the approval process took an average of 2.5 years. But the medical advances were impressive. Medicare dollars helped spawn the CAT scan, kidney dialysis, even liver transplants. These advances saved lives and, because they often avoided the need for surgery, saved money as well.
Federal health officials say they will be prudent in applying the new criterion. Gail Wilensky, head of the Health Care Financing Administration, says cost will not count if a new technology represents a significant advance and that entirely new technology will rarely be touched.
But the cost criterion will be difficult to apply to second and third generation advances. Most technologies are costly at launch, then come down in price. Medicare needs to give new technologies the benefit of the doubt. Otherwise, in their zeal to cut costs, Federal officials may cripple American medical technology, the world's best.
The commission's report opens with an imaginary -- but wholly imaginable -- scenario about a pregnant woman who must make nine different trips in six weeks just to begin prenatal care and receive Medicaid eligibility. There's one office to handle Medicaid applications, another for prenatal care, a third for Aid for Dependent Children coverage, a fourth for immunizations.
The list is long, the barriers intimidating for a woman already overwhelmed by poverty. Many women never even start the process, fearful that they can't pay for prenatal care and not realizing that it might be free or subsidized.
Some communities, the report says, could provide all services at one site, one-stop shopping. Others cannot. But in any case, a woman should be able to become part of the system at just one entry point. The commission also endorses the use of case managers, who could range from social workers to specially trained people from the community, to assess and monitor care.
The commission's suggestions are not new. Rather, they reflect one of the tenets of public health: If you devise a service that gives people what they're looking for, they'll come. But coordinating the prenatal-care system isn't enough. The resources have to be there, and too often they're not. For instance, there's a shortage of physicians willing to accept the amount of payment Medicaid provides, and of certified nurse-midwives. There are nowhere near enough treatment programs for pregnant women who abuse drugs and alcohol -- programs for which the commission wants Congress to establish optional Medicaid coverage.
Thousands of poor, low-birth-weight babies are alive because of gains in medical technology. Thousands more could be saved if America would only press for the same gains in medical bureaucracy.
The change comes after mounting evidence that some of the 53 Red Cross blood centers have been sloppy in conducting tests or keeping records, and that virtually all have been struggling to process an enormous increase in tests. The errors were mostly clerical but had the potential to kill. In one case, the F.D.A. found an AIDS-contaminated blood unit mislabeled, ready for shipment to a hospital.
To revamp the system, the Red Cross will close most of its 53 testing laboratories, each following its own procedures, and replace them with six or eight standardized laboratories. It will adopt a single computer system to replace the confusing babble of 10 different ones. It will retrain its workers and set up new local oversight boards.
None of this will guarantee the safety of all blood transfusions. There is a "window" of time right after a person has become infected with the AIDS virus during which screening tests cannot detect the infection. The risk, however, is very small. Only 15 cases of AIDS have been attributed to blood transfusions that passed the screening tests. And estimates of the amount of infected blood that escapes the testing system range from 1 in every 40,000 pints of blood to 1 in every 150,000 pints.
Some small risk is inescapable. But the admirably decisive Red Cross reorganization should reduce the chances that human blunders will add to the toll.
Although such a bargain may seem worthwhile on its face, in fact women receive little useful information. The benefits to the rapist, however, are clear. He spends less time in prison and is back on the streets sooner.
If a rapist tests negative for HIV antibodies, it may mean he does not have the virus. But it might also mean that he was infected so recently that he has yet to develop detectable antibodies, though he is capable of transmitting the virus to others.
On the other hand, if the rapist tests positive, it does not necessarily mean he was infected at the time of the rape or that he transmitted the virus during the rape. Any lapse of time between the rape and the test introduces the chance that the rapist was exposed to the virus
after
the rape.
Given the fact that few convictions are obtained immediately after the crime, even by plea bargaining, this possibility almost always exists. In addition, the virus is not automatically transmitted through vaginal intercourse. In fact, the most reliable evidence from AIDS epidemiologists puts the likelihood of transmission after one incident of sexual intercourse at one chance in 300 to 500.
Imagine that an admitted rapist is tested five months after the crime. He contracted HIV and developed antibodies while out on bail or in detainment. The survivor learns that the rapist tested positive but has no way of knowing when he was exposed. What she has gained is the knowledge that she may or may not have been exposed to HIV when she was raped -- exactly the same information she would have had without obtaining his test results -- and a greatly increased anxiety level. What the rapist has gained is more tangible: a lighter sentence. Who benefits here?
Or imagine that the rapist is tested two months after the crime. He was infected at the time of the rape but still has not developed antibodies. His negative test results cause the survivor to believe that she has not been exposed. She may neglect to seek information about her own HIV status. If she was infected, she may pass the virus to someone else.
It must also be remembered that accused rapists, like all accused persons, are entitled to the presumption of innocence unless guilt is established. Given the rampant discrimination associated with AIDS, sacrificing an accused person's right to privacy and confidentiality sets an unacceptable and dangerous precedent.
And it should also be remembered that no matter what the complainant learns about an accused or convicted rapist's HIV status, she will need to be tested herself -- immediately and again, 10 to 12 months later. The complainant should avoid high risk behavior in the interim and should have available to her the most effective treatment available against HIV infection. The possibility of exposure exists with every rape.
Some argue that any information, however inconclusive and uncertain, is better than none. Yet testing the admitted rapist not only fails to tell the survivor whether she has been infected but can result in false alarms and false assurances. Plea bargaining for information about a rapist's HIV status may well backfire, leaving the victim, her partners and her community at increased risk.
Dennis deLeon is chairman and Alisa Lebow an investigator for New York City's Commission on Human Rights.
All the while, nursing homes continue to expand, their lobbyists insisting that the need for beds will rise as the population ages. As the Kanes and other experts have noted, such claims lead to a self-fulfilling prophecy.
The Federal Health Care Financing Administration, which hands out Medicare and Medicaid money to nursing homes, gave them $20 billion in 1989. Medicaid legislation allows funds to be spent on what's called the personal-care option. Many experts note that, while institutional "care" costs an individual $30,000 to $60,000 a year, the same level of care at home typically costs around $15,000.
But the health-care agency continues to finance programs that provide institutional care to the exclusion of home services, even though personal care has proved less costly.
Not to mention more appealing. "Nobody wants to live in a nursing home," says Wade Blank of American Disabled for Attendant Programs Today, a protest group. "That should tell us something."
His group is calling on the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Louis H. Sullivan, to direct $5 billion of the current $23 billion away from nursing homes and into what it calls attendant services. Such a shift would allow people who need help to arrange their own care in their homes -- not medical care, but personal assistance, the kind that most disabled and elderly people need.
Simply recognizing that personal care is not medical and can be managed at home could save this country untold billions of dollars. Why doesn't it happen?
It doesn't happen because the nursing home lobbying group, the American Health Care Association, has convinced Congress, the Bush Administration and the American public that such "care" is fundamentally medical, allowing the industry to continue to provide it -- in its institutions, of course.
This is absurd. What's "medical" about helping someone wash, eat and change his or her clothes?
Those opposed to changing the system say that if Medicaid financed such in-home help, the system would be overwhelmed with requests for such aid -- even though everyone admits that home care is less costly per person. But what kind of argument is this? It admits that the replacement of the current system will be so much more humane that many more people will want its services.
The Kanes are on to the nursing homes' scams, questioning many so-called professional practices. "The current orthodoxy and rules for licensure have generated an expensive form of professionally based services," they wrote in an editorial in the Feb. 28 issue of The New England Journal of Medicine.
Indeed. Some nursing homes charge residents up to $200 a day for their so-called services. At those prices, you should expect nonstop entertainment, catering from the Four Seasons, saunas, massages and personal trainers -- and an occasional outing to London or Paris.
Instead, the $200 is typically charged for the more modest "service" nursing home residents all too often endure: lying in their own waste all night; getting dressed only when the staff wants them to; being tied to a wheelchair and pumped full of drugs to keep them quiet, rolled into an out-of-the-way place to watch nurses' aides trot up and down the hall with dirty laundry and pills, while a TV blares somewhere off in the distance.
Isn't it time the Government called nursing homes on the carpet -- not just for poor care but for abusing public funds?
Mary Johnson is editor of The Disability Rag, a publication that covers disability rights issues.
To protect themselves against potential malpractice suits, physicians order countless unnecessary tests and perform valueless procedures so that they might tell a jury they tried to provide the best care possible.
By many accounts, unnecessary care constitutes 20 percent to 25 percent of the nation's health expenditures.
The cost of premiums and outrageously high jury awards have forced physicians in high-risk specialties to quit their practices. The number of obstetricians in non-metropolitan areas fell by 20 percent between 1984 and 1989, denying many pregnant women the services they need.
President Bush, in a bill sent to Congress, is encouraging states to place limits on court awards for non-economic damages such as pain and suffering and to set up a mediation system for resolving disputes. Non-complying states would find their Federal Medicare and Medicaid aid reduced.
If insurance costs are reduced and defensive medicine is curtailed, health care costs can come down and more of the 34 million uninsured Americans will be able to gain access to health care.
We think far-reaching changes, proposed in legislation to be submitted to the Senate today, are necessary.
First, participants in all Federal health programs must resolve medical injury claims in binding arbitration instead of in court. These participants include beneficiaries of Medicare, Medicaid, Federal employees' health plans, and public health and veterans' programs. Second, employees of all companies that get a tax break by offering health plans must resolve medical liability disputes in binding arbitration as well.
This legislation would take about 80 percent of all medical injury claims out of court. (It would not apply to the uninsured and self-employed.)
Mr. Bush wants the following worthy restrictions imposed on state courts: a $250,000 cap on awards for non-economic damages; reduced awards if the injured person is compensated by other insurance coverage, and periodic payments, rather than lump sums, for awards intended to compensate a person for anticipated losses. We think these limits should apply in binding arbitration, bypassing the courts entirely.
Under today's litigation system, 15 out of 16 people victimized by a doctor are never compensated.
Sixty percent of the cost of malpractice insurance pays lawyers' fees and administrative costs, leaving 40 percent for patients. Even worse, patients wait years for compensation. In Michigan, court litigation takes nearly three years; voluntary arbitration, about half that time.
The Senate bill would encourage Federal and state governments, medical societies and other organizations to develop guidelines that arbitrators could use to define standards of medical treatment.
Under mandatory nationwide arbitration, patients and physicians would get more consistent, more expert, more reasonable and more timely decisions. This would not only be good for health care, but also the money Americans save from reduced health care bills could be used to benefit the economy.
Pete V. Domenici of New Mexico is ranking Republican on the Senate Budget Committee. C. Everett Koop was Surgeon General.
The bill adopts a play-or-pay system whereby employers provide basic medical insurance or else pay a tax to enroll workers in a public program called AmeriCare. For a fee based on income, AmeriCare would cover anyone otherwise uninsured, including those now on Medicaid.
Pay-or-play puts the insurance burden on employers. It would force them to compensate by ratcheting down wages -- a disguised tax -- or laying off workers. Yet pay-or-play is defensible because it would cover 30 million uninsured Americans by building upon existing institutions.
Less defensible is the attempt to control costs with a dizzying array of toothless provisions. A board made up of payers and providers would negotiate spending targets and fees. But nothing would require agreement or impose sanctions. So much for tough cost control.
The bill's major flaw is to preserve, even protect, the principal reason for rising medical costs -- the prevailing fee-for-service system. Doctors are rewarded for providing lots of services, even if unnecessary, to patients who don't mind because they pay only a fraction of the bill. And because patients choose their doctors, insurers are unable to negotiate treatment and fees. The upshot: a system spinning out of control.
The best answer is managed care. A sponsor, perhaps a large employer or public agency, directs enrollees to a designated group of doctors and hospitals. The sponsor negotiates treatment practices and monitors quality. Because sponsors wield tremendous market power, they are able to negotiate premiums below fee-for-service plans.
Managed care restricts choice. But it's the only plan that has proved it can provide quality care in the U.S. at reasonable cost. Mr. Mitchell's bill would encourage managed care, but ineffectively. The AmeriCare program, for example, was not designed as managed care.
Another key to cost control is to make patients cost-conscious. A cap on tax-deductible insurance premiums, for example, would give consumers an incentive to choose cost-effective managed care over fee-for-service plans. This, too, is missing from the bill.
Nevertheless, the bill contains many thoughtful reforms. Treatment guidelines would be developed to insure quality care and eliminate the need for wasteful tests as a defense against frivolous malpractice suits. Insurance companies would be prevented from extracting high premiums from the chronically ill. And small businesses would be encouraged to join forces to negotiate insurance contracts.
These are important ideas. But without taking on the payment system, or capping tax subsidies, they won't get to the core of the problem. Before Mr. Mitchell's bill can become the last word on health care reform, it will have to find some guts.
The wisdom behind that proposal seems plain. Neither AIDS nor any of the other diseases to be struck is spread through air, food or water to casual bystanders. Virtually the only way for an adult to get AIDS in this country is through unprotected sexual intercourse with an infected person or by sharing contaminated drug needles.
But the Justice Department, responding to an avalanche of complaints, blocked the new H.H.S. policy, leaving the old rules in place pending further debate. The two chief arguments for the ban are superficially plausible. One is that some of the infected foreigners will surely spread the virus to Americans. The other is that infected immigrants will eventually require costly care.
But the danger is slight. And if cost is the issue, then the U.S. would ban all foreigners with kidney disease, cancer or other costly ailments. It enforces no such mean-spirited policy in those cases, nor should it for AIDS.
The ban is particularly silly for short-term visitors. Trying even to identify such individuals brings widespread condemnation. The World Health Organization and European health ministers plan to boycott the international AIDS conference in Boston next year unless the U.S. changes its policy.
How to handle foreigners seeking permanent residency is a tougher issue because the longer they stay the greater the chance some might spread the virus or require care. But by one government estimate, only about 600 AIDS-infected individuals would be admitted as permanent residents each year -- compared with a million Americans already infected. And finding them among the 600,000 admitted each year would require costly testing. If the goal is to fight AIDS, this is not where to spend the money. The rate of infection is far less among the foreigners than among Americans.
What a travesty that the United States, with one of the largest AIDS-infected populations in the world, has taken a stance that implies the danger comes from abroad. The Bush Administration should reverse this ban, whose chief effect is to give the U.S. an international black eye.
In January, to his credit, President Bush asked for $258 million, an 18 percent increase, for the Federal immunization program that protects children against diseases like measles, mumps and diphtheria. Just last week he announced he would send a team of officials to six cities "to learn why kids aren't getting immunized."
But people like Dr. David R. Smith, director of primary care at Dallas's Parkland Memorial Hospital, already know why. Too much red tape -- and too little money. In Dallas, with 3,000 cases and 12 deaths in the last 10 months, 95 percent of the children who got the disease had been in the health-care system. But they hadn't been vaccinated. That would have cost about $45,000 in public funds.
Not
having done so will cost at least $1 million in public funds, for Medicaid bills.
As Dr. Smith says, "If we can't fix measles, we might as well give up."
True, that's an average. Some people at high risk for early heart attacks might gain several years; others nothing at all. But overall, the authors acknowledge, the results "may be disappointing" to dieters seeking protection from early death.
The second surprise came in The New England Journal of Medicine. Researchers analyzed the effect of constantly losing and regaining weight as often happens with yo-yo dieting. It turned out that people whose weight fluctuated sharply from year to year were just as likely to die of heart disease as complacent fatties who never even try to slim down.
So now that vast majority of dieters who just can't keep the weight off have a healthy excuse for not trying. They're protecting themselves against the dangers of weight fluctuation.
The children will die of disease, hunger and neglect. Most could have been saved with medicine, food, money and attention if only they had been provided. To allow people of any age to die when they could have been saved is moral slaughter, a reality almost too obvious to pronounce.
But I am writing this column about the slaughter of the infants not because I have suddenly become a better, wiser or more moral person, no fear, but essentially for a selfish reason.
This morning I realized that unless I wrote at once about information that had just come to me in a heavy packet from Geneva I really could not get on to another column. That happens once in a while -- a journalistic block caused by an acute attack of a sense of values.
The package was from the World Health Organization. I had asked for updated information on the casualties of the war without end, against starvation and disease. The articles and statistical tables are totally clear to anybody who can spare a few hours for 40,000 children -- that is, 40,000 a day.
Of course, as W.H.O. tables show, adults too die of preventable or curable disease and malnutrition. But of the yearly total of 50 million victims, one-third have not lived to their fifth birthday. The chance of living beyond the fifth birthday in one of those countries where children have big bellies and lolling heads is one in eight. Two-thirds of the dead children did not achieve their first birthday.
About 10,000 a day die after one week -- one week. Nothing mysterious here; no unexplained crib deaths. It is simply that their mothers did not receive sufficient "quality of care" during pregnancy and delivery. Insufficient quality of care means not enough food, medicine or clean birth cloths and water.
Every day about 8,000 children die because the countries in which they were born are unfortunate enough not to have vaccines against preventable diseases. Many of these countries do have leaders so occupied with killing their subjects that they are too busy to think of saving their subjects' children.
And, of course -- AIDS. Half a million cases among women and children. Soon new tables will be necessary, because in this decade AIDS will kill three million women and children. Yes, and about 10 million children will become AIDS orphans.
How many children die because they were born into families that had no prayer of feeding them, for lack of population-control information or contraceptives? Guess yourself -- W.H.O. does not. Only one thing is sure: more today than yesterday, more tomorrow than today.
And how many die of the disease called national politics? How many were put into their graves because of warfare among parties, regions and tribes that forced their parents to live worse than animals in the field, as their babies died? What killed these children and their parents -- bacteria, our unconcern, or leaders who are called "Your Excellency" when they come to preen at the United Nations? Most often, I suppose, all three.
The United Nations -- a great opportunity arises for it. Surely it does not need another politician, diplomat or civil servant to become the next Secretary General, a job opening soon. It needs a scientist or physician of renown, to lead in the war without end. A man or woman wise, strong and true enough to do that who could also handle with honor the marginal diplomatic role of the Secretary General.
In a short time, a search committee could produce a new kind of Secretary General, one who would keep our attention on children who die every year before they are 5, on their parents and on their killers -- viral, economic or human. Say a month -- which would be 30 times 40,000, give or take a few thousand.
The KA-BOOM that you hear is ideological principle colliding with personal feelings, and the right to privacy of one group of Americans running smack dab into the right to know of another.
The question is how much doctors, nurses, and other health care workers are obliged to tell us about their medical condition, and the answer, so far, is not much. In recent weeks both the American Medical Association and the American Nurses Association have rejected the idea of compulsory AIDS testing for their members.
But the issue will come up again and again, as more worst-case scenarios emerge. Little will be heard of the best cases, the doctors who are HIV positive, take precautions and never infect a patient, or the ones who immediately stop performing invasive procedures when diagnosed. Few will remember that Ms. Bergalis's dentist is the only health care worker in the country known to have transmitted the AIDS virus to a patient, or that the risk of a doctor becoming infected with the AIDS virus in the course of his duties is much greater than the risk of his transmitting it.
What will increasingly be heard is this hypothetical:
Q. You learn that your pediatrician has AIDS. What do you do?
A. Find another pediatrician.
In my ideological world, that is the wrong answer. The right answer would be to make sure that the doctor is meticulously careful, uses double gloves and fresh instruments and washes hands assiduously. That is the answer that would encompass the warp and woof of a social fabric that allows for mutual risk and advantage, that says that everyone should give a little, the doctor with more protections, the patient with a more open mind.
In other words, ask some parents to put their children at some risk, however small, for the sake of principle and fairness.
KA-BOOM.
Principle and fairness have never been the watchwords of AIDS discussions. Fear, uncertainty and blaming the victim continue to be the rule. Not long ago, we were told that AIDS could not be transmitted by health workers.  Now, because of the Bergalis case, we know that it can. And in the great big risk pool of life, many who can choose between a doctor who is infected and one who is not are likely to choose the latter. Most doctors who announce that they have AIDS might as well give up their practices; they will lose patients more quickly than T-cells.
As always, we yearn for bright lines, for guarantees, for absolutes. People look at photographs of Kimberly Bergalis, baked down to the bones by illness, and see themselves. But bright lines are neither available nor, in the last analysis, right. It is not simply that months can elapse between infection and detection, making testing unreliable. Imagine a United States in which an entire professional class will be required to be tested for disease and the results made known to all their clients, and you imagine a United States qualitatively different than the country we have always known.
The Bergalis case has become the center of a national debate. And the debate conjures up conundrums as troubling as any, more difficult than most. Policing is in order, by patients and by health care workers. Doctors must take precautions, to protect their patients and themselves. Patients must demand those precautions and find other care if they are not followed. Over the last decade, we have learned about safe sex because of the AIDS epidemic. Now, until a cure for the disease is found, we will all learn about safe medicine.
Starting this week, Anna Quindlen's column will appear on Wednesdays and Saturdays.
Both are instances of
life-style discrimination
, a term rapidly entering the public vocabulary. Desperate to cap rising health care costs, employers are seeking greater control over employees' private lives. The least onerous of these interventions are economic incentives offered to those who lose weight, lower their cholesterol levels or quit smoking. More troubling are the penalties, puritanical and discriminatory, imposed on those who fail to meet company standards.
The pariah status of smokers provides a worrisome example. The cancer risks associated with smoking justify making public places smoke free. Yet those who wish to risk disease should be allowed to do so privately without fear of repercussion -- except, perhaps, the added insurance cost of belonging to a higher risk group.
It hasn't worked that way. At least 6,000 companies now refuse to hire smokers; some dismiss smokers they discover on the payroll. The Indiana Legislature, angered by what happened to Ms. Bone, passed legislation that protects the employment rights of smokers. A dozen states have such legislation. A dozen more are considering it.
The city of Athens, Ga., experimented briefly with discrimination on the basis of cholesterol level. In an effort to decrease the number of heart-related health claims, Athens declined for a time to hire even qualified employees with cholesterol levels that exceeded the city standard.
The program was junked under pressure from the American Civil Liberties Union, which argued that the law prevented recipients of Federal funds from discriminating on the basis of health. Private companies are free to do as they wish -- though, as in the Bone case, wary state legislatures are beginning to set some limits.
The Indiana Court of Appeals recently ruled in favor of Mr. Winn, who had sought unemployment benefits because, he claimed, his firing had been unjust. The unanimous decision said that the company had failed to demonstrate that its rule had a reasonable connection to business interests.
Companies are justified in providing employees with economic incentives to eat more healthily and to drink and smoke less. They may even be justified in assigning those who live less healthily to risk groups that pay more for their health insurance. But employers would do well to refrain from invading an employee's personal life with edicts that do not bear on fitness for work.
The degree of risk is difficult to measure but almost certainly very small. Thus far only one infected health practitioner -- a Florida dentist -- has been found to pass the AIDS virus to his patients through medical procedures, and even that case is less than certain. In all the other highly publicized cases of infected practitioners, not a single patient has yet been found harmed.
The Centers for Disease Control, using a disputed mathematical model, estimated that 13 to 128 patients may have been infected with AIDS during surgical or dental procedures between 1981 and 1990. But the numbers could rise as AIDS spreads more deeply into the medical profession. By one estimate, there may be 2,000 or more infected surgeons and dental workers now practicing in the country.
However small the risk, it can and should be made even smaller. Sensible new guidelines issued this week by the Centers for Disease Control would make it very difficult for an infected practitioner to operate unsafely or on unsuspecting patients. The guidelines recognize that most medical procedures pose no risk at all because AIDS is not transmitted through superficial contact.
But the guidelines say that health care workers who perform "exposure-prone" medical procedures should learn whether they are infected with the AIDS virus, presumably by having themselves tested. If infected, they should stop doing such procedures, unless they get permission and guidance from special review committees, and then tell patients they are infected.
Appropriately strict, these guidelines put the burden where it belongs -- on practitioners and their peers to justify what procedures can be performed by an infected health care worker. And they leave the final say with the patient.
The guidelines are certain to be enforced. Medical institutions and insurers are sure to insist they be followed to avoid malpractice claims. And the Senate has passed legislation that would require states to adopt them and to discipline health workers who fail to comply, on penalty of forfeiting Federal health financing.
Patient protection is rightly favored in the guidelines over the careers of infected doctors. But Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina would go destructively further. He pushed a bill through the Senate that would impose criminal penalties up to $10,000 and 10 or more years in jail on health workers who know they are infected and fail to tell patients before performing invasive procedures.
That approach would be recklessly divisive, triggering anger and resentment in the medical profession without accomplishing much beyond the strict guidelines already being put into effect.
Bauer, president of the Family Research Council, who says it's an "invasion of privacy." Nor to Representative William Dannemeyer, who calls its $18 million price tag "wasteful government spending." And not, perhaps, to the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr. Louis W. Sullivan, who has suddenly blocked its funding.
It's easy to see why the questions might rile some conservative and "family values" groups. Several questions ask about practices like oral and anal sex that some people consider unmentionable. But the privacy of participants in the study, to be conducted by researchers at the University of North Carolina, will be protected. The youngsters would need their parents' informed permission before taking part, and wouldn't have to answer questions they didn't want to. As for that $18 million, it's tiny compared with the financial consequences of teen-age pregnancy.
The Public Health Service laudably seeks a reduction in the rate of unwanted pregnancies and a rise in the age of first intercourse by the year 2000. (At present 27 percent of American girls and 33 percent of American boys are sexually active by 15.) But that goal won't be reached without the kind of information the North Carolina study can provide. Dr. Sullivan says he wants to become more familiar with the study. His department's efforts to understand teen-age sexuality deserve the same staunch support he has given the campaign to reduce tobacco and alcohol abuse.
One study of more than 2,000 male and female heart attack victims at 112 hospitals found that even though the women had reported more disabling chest pains than the men, they were only half as likely to have received a critical diagnostic test known as cardiac catheterization, and thus only half as likely to have received coronary bypass surgery.
The other study, of 82,000 patients in Massachusetts and Maryland, reported similar results and found that women also lagged in receiving another major treatment, known as coronary angioplasty.
How could this happen? One explanation is that many doctors believe chest pains are less worrisome in women and that coronary surgery is riskier and less effective in women than in men. It is also possible that women are more willing to change life styles and take drugs to avoid surgery.
Neither study determined whether the women had been undertreated, the men overtreated, or both had been treated appropriately. But the findings raise suspicions of a pervasive gender bias. Most studies of preventing, diagnosing and treating heart disease have involved only men, leaving many doctors woefully ignorant of how to recognize and treat heart disease in women.
The problem extends to other areas of medicine as well. The Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs of the American Medical Association, in a report published in the association's journal this week, concluded that women were far less likely than men to receive a kidney transplant or a diagnostic test for lung cancer.
Stereotypical attitudes and prejudice by doctors may well be one reason. The council cites evidence that "physicians are more likely to attribute women's health complaints to emotional rather than physical causes." And doctors may consider men's role in society "greater than women's."
Even without a complete explanation, remedial efforts have been started. The National Institutes of Health has launched what it calls "the most definitive, far-reaching study of women's health ever undertaken" and is pondering how to enlist more women in medical studies. And the House passed a bill yesterday that would increase money and research on women's medical problems.
But the crucial need is changed attitudes -- so that care is based solely on medical considerations.
The letter was from three doctors with the California Parkinson's Foundation, who suggested that "all prescriptions be typed or printed . . . until the health care profession is more familiar with selegiline."
That sounds like a wonderfully sensible precaution for
all
drugs -- until the health care profession is more familiar with penmanship.
Empire insures all applicants and, as of now, charges uniform rates. But commercial insurers don't play by these rules. They turn away high-risk applicants, and are thus able to charge low premiums for people with good health records. That leaves Empire with a higher concentration of unhealthy subscribers, forcing it to raise rates, which drives away even more low-risk customers. Empire has lost 430,000 customers since 1988, and lost $54 million in just the first five months of this year.
Under the proposed change, Empire would charge one rate to low-risk small-business customers and another, higher rate for poor risks and individuals. The danger is that thousands of poor-risk subscribers would be unable to afford coverage, winding up on charity at taxpayer expense.
But attacking Empire won't solve this problem.  What's needed is comprehensive reform that would rein in commercial insurers.
The best answer is a system known as managed competition under which every individual would be part of a large group. A sponsor, probably a large employer or government agency, would solicit bids from private insurers, which would be required to offer coverage to everyone at uniform rates. Nor would insurers be allowed to cancel policies of people who became chronically ill.
Managed competition, in other words, would force every insurer to play by the ground rules that Empire has long used.
Administration officials sought, for instance, to purge mentally disabled people from the Social Security program. Theoretically, the idea was to root out malingerers. In practice the harsh cuts, ultimately restored by the courts, deprived thousands of handicapped people of subsistence and pushed many into the streets.
The cutbacks aggravated a national homeless problem created by careless mass release of patients from mental institutions and the gentrification of cheap housing in big cities.
After a decade of Republican rule, however, the problem can no longer be shrugged off or blamed on Democrats, and finally there are signs of a responsible response from the Bush Administration. Last year it formed an interdepartmental Task Force on Homelessness and Severe Mental Illness. With the recent appointment of an advisory panel of experts, the group has begun its work in earnest.
Given some evidence of Federal will, New York and other states show there's a way. A practical policy begins with outreach teams. They work the streets and parks to cajole mentally ill homeless people into drop-in centers where they can get a meal, a shower, TV, conversation and therapy.
Eventually they can be provided with transitional and permanent housing in single-room-occupancy hotels, with caseworkers on hand to help secure benefits and monitor medication.
Demonstrably, such programs work -- and would work better if more localities could find the resources to pursue them on an adequate scale. Officials of the new Federal task force estimate there are 200,000 homeless mental patients nationwide. Sensible programs for them might cost $3 billion a year.
That figure shouldn't be taken as prohibitive. The Federal Government now spends more than $7 billion on Social Security and Medicaid payments to support mental patients in the community, twice what states spend on such programs. Yet those entitlement payments to individuals aren't subject to any broader policy designed to move the mentally ill off the streets. Applying such a policy could save enormous sums in health, law enforcement and emergency housing payments, enough to offset much new spending.
Thus the task force promises tangible improvement in the quality of life for the homeless mentally ill -- and all residents of their communities -- at manageable cost. Whether its work will lead the White House to act constructively remains to be seen. For now it's enough to welcome an evident shift in attitude.
"We are all writing one communal poem," Anne liked to say. "It is not mine or yours, but God's poem." She believed in a river of shared images. And she believed that we are only the voices for a divine dictation.
She also believed that her personal pain was only redeemed by sharing it, that her life was valuable only if she could help others by writing about it. Knowing this about her, I think her daughters and her former psychiatrist, Dr. Martin Orne, were acting in a way consonant with her inspiration when they chose to make her therapy tapes available to her biographer, Diane Middlebrook.
I know there are those who fear the loss of doctor-patient privacy as a result of Anne Sexton's example and I understand their fears. But this was a very particular case: a poet who valued sharing this communal river of metaphor above her own narrow privacy, a poet who saw poetry as a kind of healing.
Anne Sexton was rare and generous, as a person and a poet. For a long time, her very excessiveness and openness worked against her critical reputation. It is said in France that writers endure a decade of critical purgatory after their deaths. Anne has endured nearly
two
decades. Now with this new "scandal," she may be read again for the remarkable poet she is.
I think her indifference to traditional concepts of privacy was part of what made it possible for her to write the way she did, to track the nightmare down into its lair, to ride her witch's broom into pure metaphor. As she once said to me, "Yes, the poems are excessive but I'm an excessive person."
I'm glad for any controversy that gets Anne's poems read again. They deserve to be. And knowing her as I did, I'm sure she would have welcomed these revelations. For herself that is. She would not have imposed them on others against their will.
Precedents about privacy are always thorny. What control shall the state, the law, the commonweal have over what we know about what goes on in a poet's therapy, a woman's uterus, a lawyer's consultation with her client? Notions of privacy are changing in these and a host of other spheres.
A nne Sexton felt that an individual should be allowed to determine her own notion of privacy. Like Freud, Joyce and Shakespeare, she mined the unconscious the only way she could -- by using the self as a laboratory.
Artists have little choice in this matter. Their humanity is their capital to invest or squander as their muse drives them. It is impossible to be a real poet and also adhere to the tin god of domestic propriety. The poet does not choose her subject matter; she surrenders to it.
So we need to know as much as possible about that surrender. If therapy tapes teach us, and if the poet and her heirs release them, let them be heard. As for those who want them erased, let them erase their
own
tapes!
In general, the world has been more injured by silences, erased tapes, rewritten records, shredded documents than it has ever been damaged by revelations of the heart.
Do some people denigrate Anne Sexton's revelations because she was a woman? Women's revelations are invariably thought to be less valuable than men's. Women, after all, reveal themselves all the time and their selfhood is often called selfishness -- as if it were presumption for a woman to have a self at all.
If the poet Robert Lowell had left these therapy tapes, would we rejoice or denounce? I suspect we would treat
his
"literary remains" with greater respect.
Erica Jong is author of the forthcoming "Becoming Light: New and Selected Poems." She is president of the Authors Guild.
Runaway costs are the root problem, and we must control them decisively with a national budget for health care, fee schedules negotiated with providers, and spending targets and budgets for doctors and hospitals.
I recently introduced a bill, Health USA, that would directly control costs, cover all Americans, pay for long-term care, and untie health care coverage from employment. People could continue to choose among private doctors, hospitals and health plans; but insurers and others who operate the plans would be forced to compete based on quality of care and service, rather than by skimming the least costly customers, as they do now.
How do we pay for all these improvements? The largest source of revenue would be a 5 percent payroll tax. Before doors slam at the mere mention of the word "tax," consider this: Since health insurance premiums would disappear under this proposal and out-of-pocket costs would shrink dramatically, most American families would pay less for health care. A median-income family would spend almost $500 less a year even after accounting for the taxes needed to finance the program.
My plan would mean that about $250 billion of the money Americans already spend annually would flow through the public sector before being paid to doctors, hospitals and health plans. A worker might see the payroll deduction now called "health care premium" re-labeled as "premium to Federal Health Care Fund." The deduction might stay the same, but the annual deductible ($100 under my bill) and other out-of-pocket costs would be lower on average.
National budgeting of health care costs would mean that the price of each visit or operation would rise more slowly over time. And the worker would not need to change health plans with every change of employment. Lewin-ICF, a health care consultant, has estimated that under my proposal we could provide health care coverage for all Americans for $11 billion less in the first year and $150 billion less over five years.
The rising costs of the current system crimp U.S. businesses' ability to thrive in a world where our major competitors enjoy universal health care at far lower costs. Our companies compensate by raising employee premiums, deductibles and co-payments, or by dropping benefits altogether. Doctors and hospitals see more uninsured and Medicaid patients whose bills are not fully paid, and they try to recoup these losses by raising the bills of paying patients.
Working Americans have felt the cost squeeze, as well as the barriers to productivity. Most Americans with health insurance acquire it through their employer. But more than 20 million people now start a new job each year, and many must change their health coverage and providers, if they're lucky enough to have benefits in the new job. An estimated seven million people have pre-existing medical conditions that could prevent them from moving to a better job because no new insurer would cover them.
The crises of costs, coverage and "job lock" may well get the public to recognize that it is less important how much government spends on health care than how much we spend in total and how we spend it.
We cannot afford a new program that costs $250 billion. But this is money we are already spending. We cannot afford to ignore an approach that would let us cover more people, for more services, at our existing high quality, at a far lower cost to our families, businesses and nation.
Bob Kerrey, a Democrat, is the junior Senator from Nebraska.
This year more than 10 million Americans will suffer from an episode of depression. In some cases, that episode will be best described as a case of the blues, brought on by the end of a relationship or a lousy month on the job.
But in tens of thousands of cases, the episode will gradually develop into what psychiatrists call a clinical depression. It might start with a bad night's sleep and move to a loss of appetite. Then one day, you just won't want to get out of bed. You'll wonder why you should go on.
Most people won't seek help. In fact, because of the stigma associated with depression and excuses that range from "I can beat it myself" to "It will pass," two of every three Americans with a serious depressive symptoms will not seek treatment. And of those, in a statistic that Mr. Humphry and his followers should take to heart, one in six will commit suicide.
The tragedy, however, is not that people get depressed. Clinical depressions are caused by chemical imbalances in the brain and are no more an aberration than insulin shock is to the diabetic. Rather, "the tragedy of depression-related suicide," as Dr. Jan Fawcett of Chicago's Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center has said, "is that hopelessness can be reversed."
Dr. Fawcett knows what he's talking about. Almost every day he sees patients whose depressions have been classified, in psychiatric jargon, as "treatment resistant."
In almost every case, Dr. Fawcett and his colleagues around the country have found help for depressives through some combination of medication, hospitalization, therapy and support. Though they admit that there may never be a cure for depression, they also know that suicide for the depressed is no longer inevitable.
I have seen it, not only in my own case -- where drugs and psychotherapy have silenced the suicidal impulses brought on by downswings of manic depression -- but among the hundreds of people with clinical disorders with whom I have talked in the past few years.
I have seen them pulled back from the brink by the right doctor, the right friends, the unique combination of drugs that alters the individual's brain chemistry, and sometimes even by the terrible magic of electric shock.
I have also known people with depression who have committed suicide. They have swallowed sleeping pills or jumped off buildings. And I believe that, given time and the proper treatment, it might not have had to be that way.
Finally, I have known and talked to people who have thought a lot about suicide, who mention it often, but are too scared to try. They are afraid that they will fail in their attempt, that, as one told me recently, "it might not work."
Thanks to Derek Humphry's book, that's one worry they can cross off their lists. I understand why Mr. Humphry is doing this. Rather than relying on living wills, counseling, hot lines and hospitalization, he believes that he is helping people who want the right to choose how and when they die.
It's too bad that he has not stopped to think about the thousands who feel they have no choice.
Robert O. Boorstin, a writer, is the co-leader of the West Side Mood Disorder Support Group, which counsels people with depression and their families.
The resignation of Dr. David Axelrod, who suffered a stroke in February, left a large gap. During his 12 years as Health Commissioner, he demonstrated uncommon integrity and common sense. He resisted efforts to invade the privacy of AIDS patients, and campaigned for, among other things, bans on smoking and set new rules giving hospital interns reasonable working hours and better supervision.
Beyond those issues, he cared passionately about New York's most serious and chronic health problem: the lack of adequate primary care.
Most people rely on a family doctor for routine check-ups, prenatal and pediatric services and treatment of illness in its early stages. But as family doctors abandoned poor neighborhoods, more and more patients were forced to rely on expensive hospital emergency rooms or outpatient clinics for such care; increasing numbers simply go without it, seeking help only when illness becomes too advanced to ignore. By then, of course, it is usually far more complicated and far more costly to treat.
While New York's health commissioner has no authority to build clinics on his own, he wields enormous power: he regulates rates at which the big public and private health insurance plans reimburse hospitals, doctors and clinics. The commissioner can advance policy goals by the way he manipulates those rates -- like increasing the reimbursement amounts a hospital might claim to finance a new satellite primary care clinic, reducing those for superfluous new equipment.
There will be hearings on Dr. Chassin's nomination, but the evidence so far is that he has the intellectual equipment to handle the challenges. His experience as a Federal Medicare administrator in the late 70's and then as a RAND researcher gives him sophisticated knowledge of economic and policy issues. Such knowledge, capable of saving the state millions in health costs, easily justifies Governor Cuomo's decision to sweeten the salary of $98,399 authorized for the commissioner with an additional $61,601 for heading a research institute.
Still, the job requires more than intellect. Health care politics in New York involves powerful hospitals, the doctors' medical society, employee unions, an aggressive lobby for AIDS patients and other constituencies.
Even when fiscal pressures caused politics to heat up, Dr. Axelrod stood up for fairness and the public interest, often in the face of furious opposition. That record leaves a powerful challenge for any successor. Dr. Chassin's substantive background makes him a welcome choice. But how well he meets the challenge depends heavily on principled political strength -- the Governor's and, as he grows in office, his own.
Nevertheless, the Administration's proposed fee schedule was projected to cut Medicare payments to doctors by almost $7 billion over five years. Doctors and key Congressmen were justifiably outraged. So now the Administration is reportedly revising its fee schedule to keep total payments to physicians roughly even.
Some critics say the Administration's capitulation shows how hard it will be to control health care costs. But the real message is that a deal is a deal.
Medicare has largely fulfilled its promise. By providing coverage for virtually every person 65 years and over it has developed a strong and vocal middle-class constituency. Because it is financed and administered centrally by the Federal Government, Medicare benefits, management and cost controls are uniform and stable. Younger workers have an interest in protecting Medicare for the day they and their parents will become beneficiaries.
Medicaid, on the other hand, is a disaster from virtually every perspective. Its costs are out of control, imposing a rapidly growing burden on the Federal deficit. For states, which partially finance it and must live under balanced-budget constraints, it is the fastest growing expense. Medicaid began as a $1.6 billion program in 1966, grew to $12.6 billion by 1975 and $52 billion in 1988. By the next fiscal year, it will have more than doubled in four years, to more than $105 billion.
Yet only about four million more people are served by Medicaid, now 26 million, than were served in 1975, and the percentage of poor covered by Medicaid has actually dropped from 63 to about 50 percent -- compared with 96 percent of the elderly covered by Medicare.
Physicians stay in Medicare but are dropping out of Medicaid because of lengthy delays in payment and ridiculously low payment schedules.  Medicaid pays physicians on the average only 69 percent of what Medicare would pay for common services, and in some states less than 40 percent. Medicaid averages only 57 percent of the market rate of reimbursement for a pediatrician; not surprisingly, the proportion of pediatricians who refuse to serve Medicaid patients jumped from 26 percent in 1979 to 39 percent in 1989.
The poor who are the supposed beneficiaries find a crazy quilt of eligibility standards depending on the state. Because Medicaid eligibility is tied to each state's welfare standards, which have failed to keep pace with inflation for some 20 years, 47 states failed to maintain inflation-adjusted benefit levels between 1970 and 1986. In a country that prides itself on fairness, a family of three in Alabama must earn less than $1,416 annually to qualify for Medicaid.
There are many causes of Medicaid's miseries. Its mixed nature, in which the Government contributes 50 percent to 80 percent of state costs but states set eligibility standards and administer their own programs, produces a lack of uniformity in eligibility and services and precludes efficiency or cost control. Its beneficiaries are poor and unorganized.
But at the core of Medicaid's failures is the loss of middle-class support for expanded programs for the poor. In times of economic health, like the 1960's, a middle-class consensus could be created for programs to benefit those below it on the social ladder. But in times of stagnating income, such as the U.S. has experienced for almost 20 years, this consensus erodes.
Social policy has stagnated in the Reagan-Bush era because of middle-class resentment of spending on the poor when many Americans have trouble keeping their own heads above water. This is compounded by the means testing of programs like Medicaid that excludes many deserving workers. Only Medicare provides universal access, and it remains the most popular Great Society program.
The absence of middle-class support for Medicaid has made the health of the poor dependent on a small group of dedicated members of Congress. They have been able to mandate that states cover all poor children under Medicaid by the year 2000. But these efforts have gone as far as they can without structural reforms to build more public support.
The solution to Medicaid's problems is to tie it to middle-class health benefits. The time is ripe for combining Medicaid and Medicare into a universally accessible national health care system. There is dissatisfaction with the current system: 19 million working adults and 10 million children in families headed by workers have no health coverage; insured workers worry that their coverage will not follow them to a new job; and soaring health care costs are eating into employers' profits.
By combining broadened access and more uniform eligibility for Medicaid beneficiaries to universal health coverage and strict cost controls, middle-class support can be obtained at the same time for improved benefits for the poor.
States should still play a role. They can pay for acute care, with the Federal Government taking over costs for long-term care for the poor elderly.
Medicaid will only fulfill its promise if it is consolidated into a broader health care program. Likewise, education, job training, and other forms of Federal aid must be more universally accessible if they are to win the middle-class support needed to have a better educated, efficient and healthy work force.
Stuart E. Eizenstat, a Washington lawyer, was President Jimmy Carter's chief domestic policy adviser.
Or take clinical depression. Women seem to suffer from clinical depression more often than men, but the research on antidepressants was initially done only with men. Now there's evidence that the effects of some antidepressants vary during the menstrual cycle, which means a dosage can be too high at some times and too low at others.
Or take high blood pressure. A recent review of seven major studies found that treatments that work for men may be ineffective or even harmful for white (though not black) women. True, the conclusions are tentative -- but that's because there's very little good information at all on treating hypertension in women.
Bernadine Healy, a cardiologist and the director of the National Institutes of Health, calls this presumably inadvertent sex bias the "Yentl syndrome" -- after the famous I. B. Singer story -- and cites coronary care as a particularly telling manifestation of it. Just as the girl, Yentl, had to masquerade as a man to get an education, so a woman has to experience a full-scale heart attack like a man before she can get equal treatment.
Writing recently in The New England Journal of Medicine, Dr. Healy listed other ailments especially attendant on elderly women. Many receive, if not unequal treatment, unequal attention. Osteoporosis, 90 percent of whose victims are women, is one; depression and general frailty, others.
Last week more than 100 physicians and researchers met in Hunt Valley, Md., to call attention to such inequalities, and to develop recommendations for the Office of Research on Women's Health, a component of the N.I.H. If the office is very new, the problems it addresses are very old. Too bad it's taken so long for science to recognize them.
Last week the pendulum took another swing with the publication of a study in The New England Journal of Medicine. The study, directed by Dr. Meier J. Stampfer of Boston's Brigham and Women's Hospital, monitored nearly 49,000 post-menopausal women aged 30 to 65. None had a history of heart disease or cancer.
After 10 years, the women who took estrogen for the entire period had 44 percent fewer heart attacks than those who didn't and reduced the risk of dying from heart disease by 39 percent. Those who took estrogen for part of the period lowered their risks by 17 percent and 21 percent respectively. When all the women who took estrogen were lumped together, they were found to have an 11 percent lower risk of dying from
any
disease during the study period.
The findings aren't definitive -- primarily because the study's participants were not randomly assigned estrogen or a dummy pill for purposes of comparison. Such a study is about to be undertaken by the National Institutes of Health.
Furthermore, estrogen replacement therapy is not for everyone: the woman whose cholesterol count is low, for instance, but who has a family history of breast cancer. "But if you have to make a decision in the face of imperfect data," said Dr. Lee Goldman, who wrote an accompanying editorial, "then the benefits of estrogen therapy outweigh the risks, substantially."
Menopause is not simply the sometimes welcome end of a woman's reproductive years. It also marks the beginning of heart attacks and bone fractures. This study is good news. Even better news is the attention being given the often preventable ills that attend a woman's later years.
The need to immunize is urgent. Cities like New York and Philadelphia are experiencing big outbreaks of measles. Nationally, there were 27,600 cases of measles and 89 related deaths reported in 1990, the highest rates since 1978. New York has already reported 3,600 cases of measles and 14 measles-related deaths in 1991.
Why aren't more children immunized? A key problem is outreach, particularly to parents of poor and minority children. Even though vaccines for childhood diseases have risen in price since 1981, they can be obtained at public clinics, which perform more than half of all vaccinations, at little or no cost for those who can't afford to pay. A national awareness campaign begins next week to reach mothers who might not understand the necessity and availability of vaccinations.
Another problem is money. The American Academy of Pediatrics has concluded that universal immunization for children using public clinics could be achieved for $336 million. The Administration requested $258 million for 1992. The House has already voted $298 million and the Senate $278 million. A conference committee scheduled to meet next week is likely to settle on a compromise figure.
But why settle for less when, for only $40 million more than the House figure, all children could be covered? It's rare for a conference committee to increase limits set by both houses. But it happened just last year when more money for child immunizations was voted in conference than either chamber had approved. The same logic applies this year: Paying more now will save money and lives later.
If he does, he will have put his personal feelings about abortion ahead of a Commander in Chief's concern about the health of service personnel and their families.
Good medical care -- not Federal funding or the constitutional right to abortion -- is the issue here. If a female soldier or a serviceman's wife or daughter live in the United States, getting a safe, legal abortion is simple. But it isn't if they're stationed overseas in countries where abortion is illegal; or where the blood supply is unsafe, needles aren't routinely sterilized and physicians are few.
That Americans serving abroad should have the same access to a full range of medical services as those serving at home is self-evident. Except, it would seem, to Mr. Bush.
But whatever one thinks of her proposals, medical transmission is of minor importance in spreading the virus. Ms. Bergalis's dentist is thus far the
only
health worker known to have infected his patients. What makes the issue explosive is fear; medical transmission is one of the few ways many individuals can imagine getting AIDS.
Before the Bergalis case, the most contentious AIDS issue was whether foreigners infected with the virus should be allowed to enter the United States. Here again, the effect on the epidemic would be small, adding perhaps a few hundred cases annually to the one million Americans already infected.
These legitimate but secondary issues have dominated political debate, while truly critical AIDS issues have been scanted. A report issued last week by the National Commission on AIDS cited these, among others:
Prevention.
In the absence of a vaccine or drug cure for AIDS, the only way to curb the epidemic is through programs that teach people to avoid risky sexual and drug-using behavior.
Yet these efforts have been undercut by an unwillingness to talk frankly about sex and drugs. Indeed, the Government has just killed useful surveys of teen-age and adult sexual behavior -- to avoid controversy.
Early Treatment.
The Federal Government recommends that individuals infected with the AIDS virus but not yet sick take drugs to delay the onset of disease.
But inadequate outreach, testing and counseling programs have left hundreds of thousands of individuals unaware that they are infected, and inadequate insurance has made it difficult for those who do know they harbor the virus to get treatment.
Drug Abuse.
Intravenous drug users are now the major source of infection in some cities; they spread the virus to other addicts by sharing needles or to their sex partners through intercourse without a condom.
Yet efforts to curb the epidemic among addicts have been stalled by controversy over the best methods and by unwillingness to pay for treatment of many addicts who want to shake their habit.
Despite these failures, the Federal Government deserves credit for a substantial effort against AIDS. In the current year, it is spending $1.9 billion on research, prevention, drug approvals and special treatment programs. Indeed, the Federal research budget has grown to the point where advocates concerned with other diseases complain of being shortchanged.
But high-level leadership is missing. "In the past decade, the White House has rarely broken its silence on the topic of AIDS," the AIDS commission lamented. President Bush has made only a single speech on AIDS, to an audience of businessmen. President Reagan also ducked the issue, which touches on homosexuality and drug addiction and thus inflames many conservatives.
There is now no compelling voice to lead the fight even at lower levels. In the Reagan Administration, Surgeon General C. Everett Koop and retired Admiral James D. Watkins, then head of a Presidential AIDS commission, bravely focused attention on the epidemic, almost in spite of the White House. But today, Surgeon General Antonia Novello and the current AIDS commission are tepid successors who command little attention.
Several decades ago, Franklin D. Roosevelt roused a generation of Americans to fight polio, a scourge to which he himself had fallen victim. Today, faced with an even worse epidemic, President Bush is shockingly mute.
People with carpal-tunnel syndrome are especially eager to talk. Most blame their malady on their computers, although one woman credited her mania for crochet. Sufferers of tendinitis-in-the-wrist also blame their computers; and the tennis elbow crowd points to an aggressively athletic past.
The woman in question, however, though forthcoming about her aches, her pains and her cortisone shot, keeps quiet about what occasioned them. Honesty forbids her from suggesting that the fault lies in her backhand overhead; embarrassment keeps her from confessing that the problem may lie in the funny way she holds her breakfast coffee cup.
The managed Medicaid system would attract doctors by guaranteeing them a large pool of patients and paying higher fees. Experience elsewhere shows that the city could afford those higher fees by saving on the high cost of repeat patient visits and long hospital stays that regular preventive care would render unnecessary.
Managed Medicaid, also known as managed care, is not only more humane. It could help contain Medicaid's insistently growing costs, which now eat up 14 percent of the state budget and 7 percent of the city's. The state has directed local governments to prepare to switch to managed systems, and a task force Mayor David Dinkins appointed in April urged the city to proceed with the Brooklyn experiment, first authorized by Mayor Koch in 1987.
Mr. Dinkins has wisely and warmly endorsed the idea. But bureaucratic inertia and commissioners with reservations about the plan got in the way. Voluntary enrollments are set to begin. That sounds good, but until managed Medicaid becomes mandatory for all those eligible in the experimental neighborhood, it cannot work well. Only by guaranteeing a large pool of patients can the system overcome a persistent problem -- a paucity of doctors willing to serve the poor.
The Brooklyn project has broad support, not only from the state, the Mayor and his task force but also from Borough President Howard Golden and the Brooklyn Health Care Advisory Council.
For the pilot project to succeed, it now has to move double-time. That means the Mayor can tolerate no further delays from his foot-dragging commissioners, so that the program can switch to mandatory enrollment well ahead of its current schedule of next September.
Managed Medicaid can make a difference. But if City Hall continues its leisurely pace, it will miss a rare opportunity both to serve the public and save millions.
Mr. Rosenbaum was the victim of a revenge stabbing last August after a black child was accidentally killed by a car driven by a Hasidic Jew. When Mr. Rosenbaum was taken to the Kings County emergency room, two residents failed to notice a serious wound on his left side for 45 minutes, even though it had been noted by the ambulance crew. Investigators also discovered long delays in obtaining a chest X-ray and documenting vital signs.
Individual incompetence may be to blame. But the hospital has long suffered from chronic management problems. The Hospitals Corporation is investigating whether a senior doctor assigned residents, including the two who attended Mr. Rosenbaum, to jobs for which they were not qualified. In addition, blurred lines of authority might have caused confusion in the emergency room.
Kings County is not the only overburdened hospital in New York. Many emergency rooms are overwhelmed because poor patients use these facilities for their primary care. As a result, about half of the municipal hospitals, including Kings County, now have walk-in centers to treat such patients, in an effort to preserve emergency resources for true emergencies.
But such measures have not solved Kings County's chronic problems. The hospital has attempted corrective action in the past but seems incapable of sustaining improvements. Investigations have been launched by Mayor David Dinkins, the State Health Department and others. This time, the hospital's management and the Hospitals Corporation will have to demonstrate that Kings County is capable of lasting change.
The most expensive to treat were those born to women who smoked crack. The additional cost of each baby's delivery and care could exceed $11,000. The researchers estimate that cocaine-exposed babies cost the country more than $500 million a year. And that doesn't include the subsequent cost of health and social services required to help such children cope with the damage sustained before birth.
The extra hospital costs alone approximate the price of drug treatment for a crack addict during the months of her pregnancy. "The larger neonatal hospital costs for cocaine-exposed infants make it likely that effective treatment programs for pregnant women who use cocaine will be cost-effective in the short run," the researchers conclude.
Congress could make such programs more available by changing the rules governing Medicaid health insurance for the poor so that it would finance more drug treatment for pregnant addicts.
How much would that cost? About $125 million annually, according to estimates based on bills introduced in Congress this year. That level of spending wouldn't obviate all of the $500 million in care for cocaine-exposed babies. But taxpayers could well come out ahead.
So far this year, Congress has failed to move on the Medicaid drug treatment legislation. The new research shows there is no good reason to stall.
The risk is admittedly very small. Thus far only a single infected health care worker -- a Florida dentist -- is known to have infected any patients. But there is at least a theoretical risk that surgeons or dentists who perform highly invasive, bloody procedures might infect their patients, by passing on the virus through cuts on their hands or on contaminated instruments.
In July, the Federal Centers for Disease Control issued guidelines proposing that health workers who perform "exposure-prone" medical procedures learn whether they are infected. Those who are infected must stop doing the risky procedures or get permission to continue from expert committees. Even then, they would be required to notify their patients beforehand.
This week the State Health Department issued its own updated plan, which is as good as the Federal proposal in many respects. It calls for mandatory infection control training for patient care professionals and voluntary testing for those at risk of infection.
It would also establish new state-run evaluation panels to advise infected health workers, on a voluntary basis, as to whether their practices should be restricted. There would be checkups to make sure the restrictions are followed.
But the state balks at notifying patients lest health workers be deterred from getting themselves tested and the careers of infected professionals be needlessly endangered. Those are genuine risks. But they do not override a patient's right to be fully informed.
Last week the House Select Committee on Hunger met to talk about the Government's tepid policies toward so important a source of infant nutrition. Clearly, encouraging more women to breast-feed means making it easier for them to do so. But the woman who's least apt to breast-feed her child is not the woman in the work force, who presumably has problems finding time to nurse. It's the woman with no job, no money and no support group.
Chances are that this woman is enrolled in WIC (Women, Infants and Children), a Federal nutrition program for poor women and their children that supplies her with infant formula. She and her baby might be even better off, however, if WIC gave her all the information and support she needs to breast-feed successfully. Nursing can be nerve-racking, even slightly painful, for many women at first. All new mothers need emotional support; the youngest and poorest among them surely need it most of all.
If more women in the WIC program breast-fed, the money saved on infant formula would allow for an expansion of the WIC rolls. However, money isn't the major issue here. Health is.
For the really poor, that's no problem. For the rich, the problem hardly arises. Those hardest hit are the middle class; they frequently lose everything trying to meet nursing home bills that can run to $50,000 a year. With the help of lawyers, they transfer assets to healthier spouses, children, even friends. Then they apply for Medicaid.
The elderly refer to these maneuvers as "Medicaid planning." But they aren't comfortable with it. With the Federal Government's blessing, Connecticut's insurance companies have now teamed with the state to tackle the problem.
Connecticut residents can buy an experimental policy that will help them keep their property and their self-respect too. The plan pays for nursing home or home care bills up to the value of the policy. Once it runs out, Medicaid kicks in automatically. More important, the patient gets to keep assets equal to the value of the policy. Thus a $200,000 policy protects $200,000 in assets.
That's good news for healthy spouses, too. Currently, they are allowed to keep the family home, the car and a small income. But the family cash, securities and vacation home all have to be spent down to state-dictated levels. That insures, in the spirit of democracy, that the husband and wife both end up broke.
Not everyone is cheering the experiment. The American Association of Retired Persons, for example, opposed it on the grounds that it diverted attention from the real solution, a national program of long-term aid for all. That's a worthy goal. But so is a program that substitutes private insurance dollars for Medicaid dollars and, in the process, gives the aging one less reason for worry.
The tragedy is that many of these too-early births could have been prevented with better prenatal care for the mothers or more widespread contraceptive services to protect teen-agers.
Every year the United States sees the birth of 45,000 babies weighing less than three and a half pounds and more than two months premature. As recent articles by the New York Times reporters Elisabeth Rosenthal, Gina Kolata and Jane E. Brody point out, the smallest of them can pose profound ethical problems.
When, for instance, should one cease treating a tiny baby whose setbacks after birth -- brain bleeding, say, and cardiac arrest -- make a grim prognosis even grimmer? Who should make the decision? One mother concerned about her desperately ill premature infant was told by the doctor: "You don't make these decisions. We do."
How much better it would be if such suffering could be headed off at the start. By contraception, for example. Children born to mothers who are still children tend to be very small. Yet every year some 35,000 babies are born to girls under the age of 15. After discounting for inflation, Federal funding for contraceptive services has fallen by almost two-thirds since 1980.
Better health care could help. Many children born to crack-addicted mothers are dangerously underweight. But drug treatment slots for the pregnant are few and far between. More broadly, millions of American women don't get comprehensive prenatal care that is routine in Western Europe.
Those programs are costly. But the cost cannot match the price America now pays to care for very-low-birth-weight babies. Intensive care for premature infants costs more than $2,000 a day, and the medical bills can run to nearly half a million dollars. If the premature baby suffers long-term damage, the cost of continuing care and education may be formidable.
Medical technology has met the challenge of keeping tiny babies alive. The greater challenge is to reduce the need for those marvelous machines.
Mr. Cuomo predicts that every local government will come out ahead, or at worst break even. But that optimistic prediction is not guaranteed. Localities, especially New York City, could find themselves giving up too much. There is time for the Governor, before he submits his plan to the Legislature, to make its details match its promise.
New York is one of only five states where local governments are required to pay for a portion of Medicaid. It's not only an unusual burden but a heavy one. In the last five years, Medicaid spending throughout the state grew from $7.9 billion to $11.9 billion. Ideally, the burden would fall equally on all taxpayers. But the poor are not distributed equally -- most live in New York City -- so less-burdened localities resist.
The Governor proposes that the state gradually consolidate the now fragmented management of Medicaid and assume its full cost. It would offset the expense by taking over New York City's income tax revenues plus up to 1 percent of the sales taxes from other local governments. The plan assumes that local tax revenues will grow more slowly than Medicaid costs. If so, the state would pay the difference. But if taxes yield more than the cost of Medicaid, the state would return the overpayment to local governments.
For New York City, this plan poses a considerable risk. While the income tax is in a slump right now, it is traditionally the fastest-growing source of revenue for the city. By ceding control over this tax, its most progressive, the city could forever lose the opportunity to use the income tax for other purposes.
The Governor could mitigate that risk by setting a cap on the amount of income tax that would go to the state.
Mr. Cuomo also needs to outline his strategy for cutting Medicaid expenses. He makes his plan contingent on cost containment, yet has been silent about the details, leaving them to be worked out with legislative leaders. Cutting Medicaid's growth has proven to be so intractable a problem that the public is entitled to hear at least some plausible ideas. Unless the state can control those costs, the Medicaid burden will continue to weigh ever more heavily on all New York State taxpayers and the budgets of all localities, no matter how tax revenues are apportioned.
Mr. Cuomo is right to seek Medicaid relief for localities. The delivery of humane health care to the poor should be a state responsibility. But the Governor's bargain, as proposed so far, may not achieve its worthy objective of truly relieving local governments of a burden that legitimately belongs to the entire state.
Either kind of implant can make mammography more difficult. Given such drawbacks, purely cosmetic implant surgery may seem a long way to go for a size 38C bra. Even so, 400 women who had undergone the procedure and been recruited by plastic surgeons went to Washington recently to protest the possibility that silicone implants may be taken off the market.
In 1982, the Food and Drug Administration warned manufacturers that implants would be among the medical devices for which safety data could be required. In 1987 the agency gave specific details about what information would be asked for. In July, the data were called in and found wanting. Although the documents were many, the studies involved too few women, too little investigation of side effects and too little time.
An F.D.A. advisory committee that meets next month could accept the data and leave the implants on the market. It could reject the data and ban the implants. Or it could ask for further information, meanwhile leaving the implants available.
Lacking evidence that silicone implants are truly dangerous or truly harmless, most women contemplating surgery would probably argue for their right to make an informed choice. But while everyone can understand a cancer patient's enthusiasm for reconstruction, a woman's wish for a "better" bosom can be puzzling.
One of the women who went to Washington said of her own cosmetic surgery, "You know, it means so much for a woman not to be small, not to feel disfigured because God didn't make her enormous." To which some people, and other women in particular, might reply: "Who made you think you were disfigured? And why did you believe them?"
If they were, where was their anger at Washington for having slashed the Federal Government's share of local and state spending from 25 percent to 17 in the last decade? That cut leaves cities with disproportionately large dependent populations gasping for breath, and dollars.
How easy it is to blame the poor and the sick who do not have access to reliable medical care. It is particularly distressing that the P.B.A., which ought to be in the forefront of fighting for just social policies, name-calls instead.
The "lazy and shiftless" reference, which appeared in arbitration papers that the P.B.A. filed in its fight for a raise, was just "a jocular aside," says a lawyer for the police union. The comments, he said, were quoted out of context. The explanation is almost as offensive as the remark.
Just as offensive is how the Senate Republicans blame the poor for almost the entire state budget gap of $500 million or more. Perhaps it does not occur to them that they're open to plenty of blame for mismanagement and unconscionable spending on "member items" to curry favor back home. New York's social services need serious attention, not cheap sneering that won't reform anything.
The best way to reform national health care would be managed competition, a combination of private and public managed care plans that would guarantee coverage to every American. The spontaneous spread of such plans raises the exciting prospect that managed competition could be close at hand -- without having to fabricate elaborate public institutions.
Large corporations like Nynex and Southern California Edison have turned to managed care because it is the only system that can stop runaway medical costs. Under such plans, a large employer acts as sponsor for its employees, negotiating insurance with private insurers.
The system is well managed because sponsors wield enough clout to select high-quality physicians and bargain for low fees. The system is competitive because insurers and providers are forced to compete for sponsors' business. So far, managed care premiums typically are 10 percent lower than those for traditional fee-for-service plans, and are rising only half as fast. But even these savings could be increased, were it not for obstructive state laws.
Some states like Montana and Oklahoma have passed "any willing provider" provisions, which require managed care plans to welcome any doctor willing to accept its fees and standards. This seemingly innocuous provision is insidious. It eliminates an incentive for doctors to compete for business by offering low bids; and, by expanding the list of eligible doctors, it undermines the sponsor's ability to monitor treatment.
Other states restrict the freedom of sponsors to review physician performance or to penalize the use of outside doctors. Last week Senator Lloyd Bentsen wisely proposed pre-empting many of these practices.
Federal tax law also hinders managed care. Insurance premiums paid by employers are tax-deductible, no matter how lavish the policy. This gives employees little reason to choose low-cost managed care over high cost fee-for-service plans. Congress could limit tax deductions to the cost of basic managed care.
Congress will also need to address insurance purchases by small employers for whom coverage can be unavailable or prohibitively expensive. The remedy is to deny small employers tax-deductible insurance unless they agree to join forces to buy coverage through a common sponsor. That way insurers would be unable to tailor plans to attract only healthy employees.
To guarantee everyone coverage, Congress would need to create one new institution: a public sponsor for the uninsured at a fee based on income. But backup public insurance is part of every major health reform plan.
Managed competition is gaining converts. Blue Cross-Blue Shield, the Democrat Paul Tsongas and others have endorsed similar ideas. Congress does not need to take painful action, only clear away the obstacles. This is a revolution on the verge of happening.
With the epidemic growing, AIDS control activists and some public health officials want to give clean needles to addicts. Act Up, a support group for the HIV-infected, has begun distributing needles in direct violation of the law. But many health and law enforcement officials object. Drug addiction, they point out, is also epidemic and potentially deadly; it also endangers children and other innocents. Furthermore, they argue, needle exchange programs appear to sanction drug abuse.
Since AIDS may be spread by the receptacle used to cook up heroin and cotton used to strain it, Act Up distributes a complete set of "works" plus instructions on how to inject. Official complicity in such activity confuses the message society ought to be sending about illegal drugs.
For those reasons, needle exchange programs are best conducted in a broader context of counseling and treatment. But the city now provides only about 47,000 slots for treatment while there are probably 200,000 needle drug abusers. Keeping an addict in treatment for a year costs thousands of dollars. In the absence of more help from Washington, New York is in no fiscal condition to expand treatment services.
But finances need not bar needle exchange; a year's worth of clean works can be provided for less than $100. And recent research tends to confirm that needle exchange may reduce AIDS without increasing drug abuse.
With lives at stake and no other immediate options, the hard choice for needle exchange becomes easier to accept. The danger is that its success at reducing the spread of AIDS might diminish pressure to expand drug treatment. The Mayor merits praise for his willingness to support needle exchange; it would be better still if he now campaigned for more drug treatment.
The following advice to the White House, offered free of charge, is not entirely unsolicited. A week ago a young member of the White House economic staff came to my office in Cambridge, asking what to do about the recession -- an act that confirms the Administration's desperation.
For starters, get the problem straight. The so-called credit crunch isn't the culprit. Easy credit won't help without sufficient demand. So stop pushing the banks to make easier loans. The Comptroller of the Currency is desperately trying to reform the Wild West banking norms of the 1980's, which contributed to the savings and loan fiasco; it's dangerous and irresponsible for the White House to send the opposite message. Nor will it do any good to browbeat Alan Greenspan and the Federal Reserve into pushing interest rates lower than they are now. Any lower, and savings will start flowing out of the U.S., the dollar will drop, and we'll be saddled with inflation.
Don't count on a capital gains tax cut either. There's no evidence that it would stimulate new investment. Moreover, in the global economy, "trickle down" has been replaced by "trickle out," as American savings race to wherever around the globe they can get the highest returns. Talk about a capital gains tax cut only incites the Democrats to grandstand over the "fairness thing" and proffer their own irresponsible tax cuts.
If the White House is intent on a capital-gains tax cut, at least propose one that creates the right incentives: a three-tiered rate in which patient capitalists who hold their assets for more than six years pay no tax, speculators who hold assets for less than six months' pay through the teeth and all others are kept at the present rate.
Focus instead on raising consumer confidence. Consumers account for most of the demand-pull in the economy, but they're holding back from big purchases. Nothing dampens shoppers' enthusiasm like economic insecurity. Their confidence would get a big boost if the White House recanted on its rejection of extended unemployment insurance (financed, perhaps, by the cancellation of several Stealth bombers) and came up with a credible national health plan.
This also makes good political sense: if the recession drags on, the Democrats almost certainly will make an issue of the President's unemployment insurance veto and will point to his failure to come up with a health plan as evidence of his indifference to domestic policy.
Focus also on what Government can do to prime the pump. Announce an emergency multibillion-dollar program to rebuild and repair the nation's bridges, highways and airports. The immediate advantage is that construction jobs would quickly sop up workers who don't need much training and give them fairly good wages and benefits. No need to worry about the impact on the budget. It's perfectly justifiable to add to the public debt to improve the nation's capacity for further growth. Business executives don't flinch from borrowing money to invest in big boosts of productivity. Yes, this approach would break last year's budget deal, but the deal is on the skids anyway.
Meanwhile, to get the most stimulus out of what the Government already spends, instruct all military contractors to switch to American-based production of the weapons, goods and services they supply. (Since most big American companies make or buy their wares all over the world, corporate nationality is less important than whether the goods are actually made here.) Speed the timetable of American troop withdrawals from Europe. The Pentagon buys an estimated $15 billion a year from European vendors supplying our troops; this money, too, could be better spent stimulating our economy.
And don't forget the symbolic touches. Create a Presidential Medal of Economic Citizenship, to be awarded annually to the 10 companies that invest the most in new plant and equipment and that hire the largest number of new employees in proportion to their earnings. A little hoopla over growth wouldn't hurt at a time like this.
Replace Vice President Dan Quayle's environment-bashing Competitiveness Council with a high-profile National Growth Council, composed of leading Democrats as well as Republicans, and business and labor leaders, to advise Americans about how they can insure a better future for their kids. Not the least, stop all the Presidential and Vice Presidential golfing, tennis and boating excursions, which make the average hard-pressed American feel worse by comparison. Until after the election, switch to bowling, bingo and amusement arcades.  Robert B. Reich, who teaches political economy at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government, is author, most recently, of "The Work of Nations."
Many in Congress advocate Canada's "single-payer" plan. Under this system, Americans would continue to pick their doctor, but the Government would set fees and pay the bills. The vaunted Canadian system, however, isn't working as well as proponents claim. Costs are off the charts compared with Western Europe and have risen only a fraction less than in the U.S.
Indeed, much of Canada's cost advantage over the U.S. is due to differences in demographics, not health care delivery. Critics of the Canadian system charge that it freeloads off U.S. technological innovation and that the rationing it imposes means that, for instance, women must wait months for a simple pap smear.
Another popular proposal in Congress is unfettered competition. Individuals would buy coverage from private insurers, with the help of tax credits. The idea is to control costs by forcing medical providers to compete. But most individuals buy medical care out of ignorance and under duress; operating on their own, patients put ineffective brakes on providers.
The best answer is managed competition. Individuals would be assigned to large groups, probably at work. Unemployed or otherwise uninsured individuals would be assigned to public groups.
Members of each group would be represented by a sponsor who would negotiate coverage with medical providers. The system would be competitive, inducing providers to offer quality care at attractive costs. Yet the system would also be managed, because sponsors would have the leverage, for example, to prevent insurers from discriminating against the chronically ill. That way workers would no longer be afraid to change jobs for fear of losing their insurance.
The chief objection to managed competition is that it denies members a free choice of doctors.  That's true, but there is no imaginable way to have everything: free choice of doctor, unrationed access and affordable prices. Mr. Wofford is right to call for national health insurance; his election shows how much the public cares. But now, Congress must decide which kind. Managed care isn't perfect, but it's the best answer proposed so far.
Magic's announcement that he was retiring because of the HIV infection broke the nation's heart. In 12 extraordinary years with the Los Angeles Lakers he became one of the dominant figures in basketball history. He remains now as he was on his first day: the soul of warmth and gentleness, a smiling member of the family who always seems happy to see us.
More than 125,000 Americans have died of AIDS. The disease is full blown in nearly 200,000 others. And perhaps as many as 1.5 million are in Mr. Johnson's category, infected, but not yet ill. Estimates say that over the next three years there will be 230,000 more deaths and between 200,000 and 600,000 new infections.
In a recent report, the National Commission on AIDS was rightly critical of Mr. Bush, saying that the White House had rarely addressed the AIDS issue. And the President used one of those rare occasions to chide AIDS demonstrators for hurting Labor Day business in Kennebunkport, Me., not far from his vacation house.
The Administration has also canceled two vital surveys of sexual behavior, one dealing with teen-agers. Conservatives thought the questions might appear to "condone" casual sex.
That was a foolish and possibly tragic error. Hundreds of thousands of Americans have been infected by unsafe sexual practices. Hundreds of thousands more may follow. Only a better portrait of sexual practices will let those in the field know how to save lives.
Mr. Bush insists that "changes in behavior" will stop the epidemic. But how will those changes occur if the President himself continues to disappear from leadership against this virulent enemy. Magic Johnson knows that the epidemic is real. "We think, well, only gay people can get it -- it's not going to happen to me. And here I am saying that it can happen to anybody."
Mr. Johnson, who has played many positions in his basketball career, is now filling a Presidential vacuum. The nation can be thankful for his bravery -- and answer him with its prayers.
Washington State's Initiative 119 would have allowed adults to execute a medical directive requesting aid-in-dying once two physicians certified that they were mentally competent, terminally ill and had less than six months to live. The medical directive would also have required two unrelated witnesses.
That sounded simple enough. Washington voters thought it too simple. For every person who said the proposal would provide "death with dignity," another feared it could lead to involuntary euthanasia. For every voter who said it would give patients control of their lives, another said it would give more control to physicians.
Initiative 119 raised more questions than it answered. Can physicians be sure of patients' wishes? Can they accurately predict how much time is left? Should there not be room for psychological counseling -- that is, an opinion other than the doctor's -- before a patient decides?
Two questions stood out from all those that troubled voters, who until a few weeks ago seemed broadly in agreement with the principle of doctor-assisted suicide for patients who request it. One was whether patients mistakenly labeled as terminal, especially those in pain, might choose to die even though their pain might be manageable, and their lives longer. The second was whether the elderly might choose suicide simply to spare their families' lives and pocketbooks.
Initiative 119 may be dead, but its spirit is very much alive. "Timor Mortis conturbat me" -- fear of death troubles me -- is the famous refrain of a 16th-century English poem. It rings loudly in today's America. Yet Americans are far from clear about how to respond.
It is easy to beam confidence in the world when you're on top of it. It is truly remarkable to show that kind of poise when you're telling the world you have the AIDS virus.
Magic has given America many memorable performances, but his comments this week demonstrated that he is more than just a gifted athlete; he is an extraordinary, courageous individual.
America is always transfixed when a story like this jumps from the sports pages into a major news event. I remember the night that Len Bias, the University of Maryland's basketball star, died of a cocaine overdose. I was expecting to meet him at a political event in Washington; he never arrived.
There are certain events in sports and in our lives that seize the attention of the nation and change the way we view the world. They remind us that these stars of the court and field who seem to perform superhuman feats are sometimes all too human.
The tragedy of Magic Johnson's contracting the AIDS virus is difficult for America to face for a lot of reasons. America does not want to see flaws in its heroes -- only clean, simple perfection. We have also been reluctant to admit some of the grim facts associated with AIDS.
The news of Magic's infection is also reaching corners of our society that have either shunned the danger of AIDS or have written it off as "their" problem -- meaning gays or drug users. This brings AIDS into every home in a way never dreamed possible. How many people did we see on television Thursday night saying, "I just can't believe it happened to Magic"?
But just as Len Bias's death sparked a new awareness among our nation's youth about the dangers of cocaine, Magic's personal ordeal will have a significant impact on the debate. Magic can reach the people who are among the highest risk groups to contract the AIDS virus: teen-agers. The safe-sex lectures will now be more than just an abstract message to young people, whose sense of invulnerability has made "safe sex" seem a hollow catch-phrase. For them, the face of AIDS is changed forever.
It is very hard to admit that some benefit can come from this adversity. But as the shock of Magic's tragedy begins to wear off, the analyzing will begin. Serious questions of public policy have yet to be resolved in our nation.
There are forces in America opposed to increased financing for education about the disease, opposed to candid talk about how it spreads, opposed to any discussion of AIDS among young people. One person even testified before Congress that all people with the disease should be placed on an island somewhere in the Pacific Ocean. All that will change now. America responds to symbols and Magic will be impossible to ignore.
It's sad that it takes a celebrity's misfortune to raise the awareness of the public and Congress to such a severe health crisis. It is not a time to eulogize Magic, but to support and pray for him. But I also have a feeling that he will have a profound effect not only on the public but lawmakers as well.
I've seen him work his magic on the court and look forward to the day when that smile makes its way to Capitol Hill. It is incredibly rare when an honest-to-goodness hero comes to Washington to tell his tale. The most formidable and heroic advocate for AIDS education in America has just stepped forward.
Tom McMillen, a former player in the National BasketballAssociation, is a Democratic Representative from Maryland.
This is what AIDS looks like -- good people, lovable people, people you want to hug. Are we finally ready to face that truth? Are we finally ready to behave properly instead of continuing to be infected by the horrible virus of bigotry and blindness that has accompanied this epidemic?
This is what AIDS looks like -- good people who get sick. Artists, actors, soldiers, sailors, writers, editors, politicians, priests. The same issue of The New York Times that carried the astounding story of Magic Johnson's announcement carried the deaths of four men with AIDS: an educational testing expert, an actor, a former dancer and choreographer, and a partner in a law firm. "Loving nature," said one death notice. "Generosity of spirit," said another. Beloved by family and friends.
In the 10 years since 5 gay men with pneumonia became a million people who are HIV-positive, this illness has brought out the worst in America. We obsess about "life style" in the midst of a pyramid scheme of mortality, an infectious disease spreading exponentially.
Over the last year, we have witnessed the canonization of one AIDS patient, a 23-year-old woman named Kimberly Bergalis who says that she "didn't do anything wrong." This is code, and so is her elevation to national symbol. Kimberly Bergalis is a lovely white woman with no sexual history who contracted AIDS from her dentist. She is what some people like to call an "innocent victim."
With that single adjective we condemn those who get AIDS from sex and those who get it from dirty needles as guilty and ultimately unworthy of our help and sympathy. We imply that gay men deserve what they get and people who shoot up might as well be dead. It's a little like being sympathetic to the health-conscious jogger who dies of a heart attack during a stint on the Stairmaster but telling the widow of the couch potato, "Well, if he hadn't eaten all those hot dogs, this wouldn't have happened."
It's not how you get it; it's how you spread it. And we know how that happens and what to do about it.  Education. Conversation. Prevention. I don't want to hear any more about how condoms shouldn't be advertised on television and in the newspapers. I don't want to hear any more about the impropriety of clean-needle exchanges or the immorality of AIDS education in the schools.
On Thursday night our 8-year-old asked about safe sex after he heard those words from Magic Johnson's mouth. And I was amazed at how simply and straightforwardly I was able to discuss it. Because I don't want to hear any more about good people who aren't going to live to their 40th birthday, about wasted talent and missed chances and children who die long before their fathers and mothers do. I'm far less concerned about my kids' life styles than I am about their lives.
How are all those parents who denigrate "queers" and "junkies" going to explain this one? How are all those pious people who like to talk about "innocent victims" going to deal with the lovable basketball star, the all-time sports hero, who stressed safe sex when he told the world he was HIV-positive? Will this finally make them say to their kids, "It could happen to you," finally make them stop relying solely on chastity and start dealing with reality?
"Marc will be greatly missed," said one of the death notices. Who cares where it began; this is where it ended, in small black letters on the obituary page. One good person after another, infected, then sick, and finally dying.  Magic Johnson, with that engaging personality, that athletic legerdemain, that grin -- this is what AIDS looks like. Why can't we learn to deal with our national tragedy with as much dignity and determination as this good man brings to his personal one?
Initial construction went smoothly, but opposition to the opening of the facility has grown as completion nears. Critics say a full environmental impact statement should have been required of the project's sponsors. That ignores the fact that the criteria critics consider crucial -- the quality of the airborne effluent and the disposal of solid waste residues -- were analyzed in detail by state and city officials before construction began.
Furthermore, the plant will not be permitted to operate until it is tested under actual field conditions and an operating permit is issued.
Medical wastes are not only unsightly but dangerous. No one wants them in a residential neighborhood. Under New York's zoning laws, the only place for such a facility is in a zone in which residential construction is forbidden. If misguided opinion prevents testing and then operation -- assuming the tests are successful -- the medical waste problem will be that much further from solution. And the problem won't go away.
Beyond that, the President must also pay some attention to the commission's report, which met with a muted response in the White House when it was released two months ago. The report criticized the President for rarely speaking out on AIDS. The commission also pointed out deadly flaws in the Government's treatment and prevention strategy.
The Government urges infected people who are not yet ill to take drugs to delay the onset of the disease. But there are too few research, counseling or testing programs to handle the load, and too little health insurance to pay for it.
Furthermore, intravenous drug users are now the major source of infection in some sections of the country; they spread the virus to other addicts by sharing needles, or to non-addicted partners through sexual intercourse. But treatment that would make them drug-free is still in short supply.
Frank discussion of sexual practices is the only proven way to change risky sexual conduct. Yet the Government recently killed two studies of sexual behavior, one because of explicit questions. This prudish stance blunts the most powerful tool we have against the disease.
Vice President Dan Quayle symbolizes another Administration blind spot. Last weekend he said abstinence was the only way to stop sexual transmission of HIV. Today's teen-agers are sexually active on an unprecedented scale. Better to teach them to protect themselves than see them die.
Mr. Bush can build on the dramatic focus that Magic Johnson has given the AIDS problem. The methods are clearly at hand. All the President has to do is lead.
We've included an amendment to overturn this directive in the Senate version of the defense appropriations bill for 1992. Its fate will be decided in a House-Senate conference this week. The President has threatened to veto the entire defense bill in order to deny American servicewomen and military dependents access to safe abortions.
Last spring the nation shared a swell of pride and support for our forces in the Persian Gulf. Yet the President would tell our service members and their families that they deserve lower-quality health care than they could have at home.
In Saudi Arabia, where about 30,000 American women were stationed during Operation Desert Storm, abortions are illegal except to save the life of a woman. The laws are similar in Panama and the Philippines, where about 46,000 members of the military and their dependents are stationed.
Even where abortion is legal, American women may have to accept substandard medical care that endangers their life. Many developing countries cannot afford to test their blood supply for the AIDS virus. They lack antibiotics and trained personnel to provide high-quality health care. The results are deadly. In Latin America, complications from illegal abortions are thought to be the main cause of death in women between the ages of 15 and 39.
Lieut. Comdr. Jeffrey I. Jensen, former head of obstetrics and gynecology at the Subic Bay U.S. Naval Hospital in the Philippines, has written a letter to Congress detailing his experiences over the last two years. He saw families forced to spend their life savings to travel to another country to have an abortion. He saw military doctors prohibited from providing counseling and care they believed to be in the best interest of their patients. He saw a young enlisted woman so distraught about her inability to end an unintended pregnancy that she committed suicide.
Overturning the Pentagon directive would allow servicewomen or military dependents to pay for their own abortions at overseas U.S. medical facilities. The Defense Department admits that the current ban on using its funds for abortions would not be violated.
The appropriations amendment upholds all regulations on health care that the military itself has established, including those prohibiting third-trimester abortions unless the life or health of the mother is in danger and requiring parental notification by minors before any major medical procedure, including abortion. It would not require any military health care worker to perform an abortion if it violated his or her ethical, moral or religious beliefs.
It is appalling that women who have volunteered to defend our nation should be expected to surrender a constitutional right because they are stationed in Manila instead of Manhattan.
Frank R. Lautenberg is Senator from New Jersey. Tim Wirth is Senator from Colorado. Both are Democrats.
Mr. Perales, an experienced but unremarkable state official, will be the sixth deputy mayor in an already crowded City Hall. His job will impose another bureaucratic layer on top of the health agencies. He will oversee the Health and Hospitals Corporation, the Human Resources Administration and the Departments of Health and Mental Health.
But who will make the key decisions on health issues is unclear. The agency heads? Mr. Perales? First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel, to whom Mr. Perales will report? Or Mr. Dinkins, to whom Mr. Perales will also report?
Commissioners complain now that they have trouble getting the Mayor's attention, and outsiders who deal with City Hall complain they don't know who is in charge. The last thing the administration needs is more splintering of authority. The Mayor will have to define his new Deputy Mayor's responsibilities carefully, making clear to Mr. Perales and to commissioners what he expects of them.
Mr. Perales will have a hard enough time living down the impression that he was brought into the administration not on his merits, but because of ethnic politics. There is no doubt that the city, suffering with growing welfare and health burdens, needs as much leadership as it can get. Unfortunately, doubt remains whether a new deputy mayor, undercut by the nature of his appointment, can provide that guiding hand.
What tests should determine whether any plan merits support?
First, the plan should rely upon competition, not regulation, to guarantee low prices and high quality. Government regulators can't weed out incompetent doctors any better than they can eliminate incompetent bank managers. By this yardstick, both the Canadian-style plans and the Senate leadership's proposal fall short.
Second, the plan should rely on sophisticated purchasing agents because many individuals aren't capable of shopping for insurance on their own. They don't know how to evaluate doctors or monitor treatment. This principle works against the Heritage plan, which supports individual purchasers.
The plan that best fulfills these two principles is called managed competition; its principal architect is Alain Enthoven of Stanford University. Individuals would be organized into groups headed by sophisticated sponsors, say an employer, who would negotiate coverage with a fixed panel of doctors and hospitals and would monitor treatment. Health care providers would have to compete to win contracts from the sponsors, and would thus be forced to offer high-quality care at attractive prices.
New Federal laws will be needed to bring about managed competition. Here are some essential ingredients:
Spur Cost-Conscious Choice:
Many consumers choose costly fee-for-service plans over less expensive managed-care plans because the tax law allows them to deduct the full cost of either choice. More people would choose managed care if Congress limited the tax deduction to the premium such plans charge for basic coverage. The Heritage tax-credit plan does provide consumers incentive to choose low-cost care, but the Senate Democratic plan does not.
Prevent Discrimination:
Insurers have ferocious incentive to tailor their plans to exclude chronically ill applicants, whose treatment is very costly. To prevent this discrimination, Congress would need to require that tax-deductible plans not exclude applicants on the basis of medical condition or drop enrollees for any reason other than non-payment of premiums.
Combine Small Employers:
To prevent small employers from hiring only healthy applicants, as a way to minimize health care costs, Congress could require that they join together in large groups to buy insurance or forfeit tax deductions for health care premiums.
Create Public Sponsors:
For people who have no other recourse, Congress needs to provide automatic access to a public sponsor offering managed care. The premium would be based on income.
Override State Obstacles:
Many states, succumbing to lobbying by organized medicine, have obstructed managed-care plans. Some states limit the penalties sponsors can impose for using doctors outside the plan; other states force sponsors to accept any doctor who applies, thereby making quality control impossible. To solve this problem, Congress needs to forbid state restrictions on managed care.
When the White House finally gets around to proposing reform, its plan should be judged by the two basic tests: Does it compel consumers to choose low-cost coverage? Does it provide universal access to group coverage?
If the answers are yes, and the plan is implemented, then managed care will flourish. And no longer will Americans need fear the financial ruin of catastrophic illness.
Nowadays it is doubtful that one American in ten thousand even knows who Julius Caesar was, and surely not one in a hundred thousand can translate "Veni, vidi, vici." Today's typical high-school student, if asked why Caesar crossed the Rubicon, will reply, "To get to the other side."
When every American with a fifth-grade education could tell Julius from Augustus Caesar and automatically cried "Et tu, Brute" when betrayed by an old friend, everybody knew what great Julius looked like. If there was not a bust of Caesar sitting beside the family radio, there was a picture of that bust in the Latin primer everyone had studied at school.
That bust and its picture in millions of schoolbooks showed Caesar with a head of neatly combed hair. To be sure, there was another, less popular bust showing the top of the skull rather sparsely covered, in the style of Gen. Douglas MacArthur, but the sides generously thatched with hair.  Still, the notion that Julius hadn't a single hair on his skull would have shocked all of civilized America.
So firmly held was this idea of Caesar as a hairy man that he was traditionally played with hair by actors in "Julius Caesar," "Caesar and Cleopatra" and the stream of Hollywood potboilers about the Julians which packed movie houses for two generations.
Who does not remember Warren William, Hollywood's original Perry Mason, playing Caesar with the same full but unfluffed head of hair that distinguished Perry Mason? Scarcely anyone, if we judge by American reaction to the discovery about the true state of great Caesar's scalp.
Even The New York Times, once as quick to recognize breakthrough events in the classics as in science, buried the story back between the obituaries and the market quotations. One New York tabloid, with its usual firm grasp on the irrelevant, ran the story under the headline "Hairy Ears Scandal," focusing on the discovery that though Caesar's head was utterly bare, hair grew profusely in his ears.
The findings were first published in the Journal of the American Tonsorial Anthropological Association. They result from years of research by a team of tonsorial anthropologists at the University of California at Twentynine Palms. Through ingenious use of isotopes and electronic microscopy the team was able to create computer-enhanced pictures of Caesar's hairline.
Dr. Emmeline Granger, professor of antique tonsoriology at U.C. Twentynine Palms, refused to believe the first enhancements. "So destitute of hair was the Caesarean skull enhancement," she writes, "that we at first suspected the data we had subjected to isotopical and electronic-microscopical analysis were not Caesarean at all. The total absence of follicle apertures anywhere in the computer enhancement seemed more consistent with granite than with human scalp structure."
Publication of the findings on Caesar's scalp have created uneasiness in the tonsorial-anthropology community. Its members have been gearing up for a big project code-named "Holy Moses." Its aim: to determine whether Moses actually had the long, flowing beard attributed to him by centuries of artists.
There is considerable fear that "Holy Moses" might lose vital Federal funding as a result of the Caesar research. Tonsoriology scholars are unduly sensitive to Senator Jesse Helms's impatience with Federal spending that produces socially embarrassing nudity.
If Senator Helms thinks the research might leave Moses's jaw as naked as Caesar's scalp, they fear, he might cancel "Holy Moses." Paranoia is everywhere these days.
For instance, what percentage of recipients experience the more common side effects of these implants, namely rupture or contraction? Do the implants compromise the ability of mammography to detect cancer early? Are there longer-term risks, like auto-immune disorders or cancer?
Such data are obviously necessary. What was not so obvious, until the recent hearings, is the importance of breast implants not only to women who had had mastectomies -- that was predictable -- but to women who simply wanted bigger breasts. For them, implants meant the difference between feeling normal and, as one implant recipient put it, feeling "disfigured."
Some women will find such a sentiment regrettable; but surely all women will agree that restricting the implants to those who have had breast cancer, as some panelists suggested, is both patronizing and stigmatizing.
Assuming that Dr. David Kessler, the F.D.A.'s Commissioner, accepts the panel's recommendation, breast implants will remain available, and women can still choose to undergo a procedure that may or may not be risky for them. Given the lack of clear evidence one way or another, that's just where the choice belongs.
Year after year, the White House has evaded the confirmation process by making recess appointments to the Legal Services Corporation after Congress adjourned. And Reagan-Bush lawyers routinely ignored statutes and court decisions condemning their discriminatory handling of Social Security disability claims.
The Iran-contra affair was perhaps the ultimate end run. And just last week President Bush instructed his agencies to interpret the new civil rights law on the basis of a White House memo placed in the Congressional Record by the bill's
opponents.
Here's how the law ran backward in the gag rule case:
In 1988 the Health and Human Services Department, driven by anti-abortion ideologues, issued a regulation enforcing a 1970 law in a radically new way. The law said only that abortion could not be a method of family planning at federally subsidized clinics.
The regulation, however, said that doctors and health professionals at the clinics couldn't even mention abortion as an option. If a poor woman asked about abortion she was to receive the answer, technically accurate but mean and misleading, that "the project does not consider abortion an appropriate method of family planning."
This May the Supreme Court found the regulation constitutional and within the scope of the law Congress passed. Senate and House majorities profoundly disagreed and passed corrective legislation. The President vetoed the legislation and the House failed by a handful of votes to muster the two-thirds needed to override. The net result is that the Government, notwithstanding the will of Congress, is free to enforce this cruel gag order. That's undemocratic and threatens the rights of professionals and patients to exchange vital information.
Congress often sets broad policy and leaves detailed enforcement to executive agencies with the general understanding that the executive branch will honor Congressional intent. Yet both the gag rule and the Supreme Court decision upholding that rule represent a perversion of that process.
Writing for a 5-to-4 majority, Chief Justice William Rehnquist ruled that restraining professional speech in federally funded family planning clinics was simply a legitimate extension of the Government's clear right not to finance abortions. But that is not what Congress said.
Backward lawmaking thus fabricates oppressive orders and imputes the coercion to Congress. How can Congress protect itself? The Senate can be more careful about judicial nominees. And both chambers must keep trying to amass veto-proof majorities.
In the gag rule case there's one thing more that Congress can do. It can keep passing the corrective law until President Bush signs it, weary of the justified criticism from Americans who see through this illegitimate, malevolent lawmaking.
As patients left the hospitals, the state transferred or laid off the doctors, nurses and aides who cared for them. Much of the state's mental health budget remains tied up in the hospitals, but that money pays for utilities, maintenance and administrative costs. Such overhead accounts for only about $28,000 of the $103,000 it now costs to support a patient for a year in one of the hospitals.
Thus, to send one patient from the streets into a hospital means an additional $75,000 per year. Reinstitutionalizing 5,000 would require enlarging the mental health budget by more than a quarter, or $375 million per year.
New York taxpayers would be responsible for virtually the entire bill. The Federal Medicaid program, which picks up about half of other health costs for the poor, won't cover mental hospital care for patients between 21 and 65. Nor could the state extract room and board payments from the Social Security, veterans' or other benefits of involuntary patients.
Why does secure hospital care cost so much? Because it is labor-intensive. Patients require supervision around the clock 365 days a year. The state's staff-to-patient ratio of one to one isn't considered excessive. Couldn't some corners be cut on staffing? That again raises ethical and legal questions; it suggests a return to the "snake pit" conditions that led to patients' deinstitutionalization in the first place.
In any case, there's a fiscal reason to avoid corner-cutting. New York's mental hospitals collect $511 million annually from the Federal Medicaid program for patients over 65. Hospital inspection and accreditation groups closely monitor conditions and patient-staff ratios. The Government would not make payments to a hospital that has lost its accreditation because of careless expansion.
To the extent that budgets permit, the city and state have begun to pursue a course that's far more sensible than reinstitutionalization: creating more single-room-occupancy residences, with caseworkers and other support. These are for voluntary patients, avoiding any legal question; and residents contribute to their room and board, often from Federal benefits. The public cost is not $75,000 but $13,000 per year. Mention that difference the next time somebody says, "Why not reinstitutionalize the mentally ill?"
But in part because people suffering from AIDS or substance abuse are especially susceptible to active tuberculosis, the number of cases then rose sharply, to 4,176 in 1990, more than double the 1978 figure. That gives New York State the highest incidence in the nation. Some 84 percent of the New York cases occur in New York City. Poverty, poor health care, homelessness and illegal immigration also feed the trend.
Public health officials in the city are also alarmed at an increase in tuberculosis cases that resist common drugs. These may develop as patients neglect to take medications, thus remaining infected with organisms that survived initial doses.
Containing the new epidemic requires a new investment in systems designed to detect tuberculosis cases early and follow through with patients who are poorly educated, addicted, homeless or mentally ill. Proven responses involve outreach caseworkers who visit patients and remind them to take their pills; special hospital wards; residences for the homeless, and for the most recalcitrant, involuntary confinement.
Doing all that would cost money, but the amounts appear manageable -- and the spending necessary -- even as the fiscal crisis deepens. Official estimates add up to $30 million annually to be shared by city and state. Some of the money might be found in existing budgets; more could be offset by Federal and private insurance payments.
A strong fiscal argument actually buttresses the case for public health spending. The hospital bill for a patient whose tuberculosis has gone undiscovered and untreated may exceed $10,000, and such a person might have infected several others. The arithmetic is persuasive: Whatever it may cost to contain the epidemic, it will cost more not to.
City officials say good health commissioners are hard to recruit because first-rank physicians and health system managers usually take a big pay cut when they accept public service. Yet the state's search committee found a promising candidate in Dr. Mark Chassin, a former Federal Medicare administrator and Rand Corporation researcher who was nominated by the Governor this summer.
The problem in Albany is the State Senate, which has neglected its duty to hold confirmation hearings. Senator Mark Tully, the Long Island Republican who heads the Senate's Health Committee, now says he won't even call a hearing until January. That would be nearly a year after Dr. Axelrod's departure, even though the prospect of a special budget session this month provides the chance for immediate action.
Meanwhile the state's health problems multiply: tuberculosis, measles, AIDS and drug abuse are epidemic. Medicaid costs have exploded alarmingly. New York City's staggering public hospitals are locked in bruising negotiations with private affiliates -- a problem that underscores the need to appoint a new H.H.C. president.
Mr. Tully says he wants to postpone hearings until the full Senate reconvenes because these issues are so complex. On the contrary. The health urgencies make it imperative to confirm the new commissioner as soon as possible.
Two truths have already been confirmed. First, that frank discussion of sexual practices is essential to prevent risky sexual conduct. Second, that data on sexual behavior are dangerously out of date; the last comprehensive study was the Kinsey Report in 1948.
But so far, the Bush Administration has put politics ahead of science. It killed two badly needed studies of sexual behavior, one dealing with teen-agers, because conservatives thought the questions "condoned" casual sex. There is no evidence that sexually explicit questionnaires increase sexual activity.
Yet sexual activity among teen-agers is rising on its own. Nearly a third of all 15-year-olds have had intercourse at least once. By age 19, that number jumps to 75 percent for women and 86 percent for men. White House bromides -- appeals for abstinence, for example -- will have little effect on these trends. How could they at a time when sex is used to sell virtually everything?
The last report of the National Commission on AIDS suggested a better strategy: Improve facilities for testing, counseling and research . . . provide more drug treatment for intravenous drug users, who can spread the disease to non-addicted partners . . . and give the nation a vocal President who is serious about eradicating the disease.
Beyond heeding the report, Mr. Bush could perform a great service by abandoning the puritanical logic that leads to a virtual conspiracy of silence on AIDS. Far better to engage young people in the kind of frank and open discussion that could save their lives.
Through the 80's the Men's Shelter, managed by the Human Resources Administration, epitomized the public's worst nightmares about official efforts to help the homeless. Chaos reigned as men checked in for meals and vouchers that purchased beds in nearby flophouses. Between meals, homeless men milled constantly on the street, dealing drugs and panhandling.
Then last year, the H.R.A. closed down the meals and vouchers operation. The agency renovated the building to create space where 90 men can sleep and attend meetings. And it invited Manhattan Bowery Corporation, a respected group that ran alcoholism clinics in the old shelter, to set up a rigorous substance abuse recovery program.
Now men referred to the shelter spend a week or so drying out, then are interviewed for admission to the treatment program. Those rejected are referred elsewhere. Those accepted enroll for months of group therapy. Eventually they progress to education or vocational training, placement in permanent housing, perhaps a job in a nonprofit business -- demolition, street cleaning, private security -- run by Manhattan Bowery.
Visitors to the shelter today might meet men like James, Ray and Randolph. A few months ago they were on the streets, ruled by drink and drugs. Now all three are sober and motivated. Randolph, who walks with crutches, plans to get a room of his own and a job nearby; Ray hopes to establish a construction business, and James is working toward a technical school degree.
Meanwhile, the once-notorious block of East Third Street no longer teems with the intoxicated, stoned and mentally ill. The new shelter poses no more threat to its surroundings than a well-managed Y.M.C.A. Leaders of the local community board once cursed City Hall and the H.R.A. Now they make a point of accompanying visitors and volunteering their expressions of support for the new shelter.
Even more important is the program's implicit promise. Of 250 men enrolled in the first months, about half have been removed from the streets for the long term; 100 moved out to permanent housing and independent lives; 24 were placed in other treatment programs.
The rest, who either walked away or were asked to leave, aren't a problem for the neighborhood. Since they no longer get free food or lodging, they have no reason to hang around on the block.
The average length of stay in the program is four months, so the 200 beds would accommodate 600 men a year. Assuming the 50 percent success rate continues, 300 of them would be permanently removed from the streets each year. The cost of $36 per person per day is slightly cheaper than that of a traditional shelter.
The Mayor's plan would create 2,500 program beds at 24 new sites. Even if the success rates are lower, the fully instituted plan still might permanently remove as many as 3,000 homeless from the streets each year. Programs on that scale would give the city its first real chance to control the problem.
Even so, some critics of the Mayor's plan have encouraged the idea that it would do nothing more than create 24 new versions of the old Men's Shelter. That's ignorant and unfair. City Hall has proved it can succeed very well with the homeless where previous administrations failed miserably -- on East Third Street.
The two best tax-credit plans -- authored by Stuart Butler of the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank, and Prof. Mark Pauly and colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania -- would require individuals to purchase insurance on their own. The Heritage plan would provide a tax credit -- refundable as cash to families too poor to pay tax -- equal to a percentage of the family's actual medical costs; the higher the family's medical outlays, the higher the percentage credit provided. Dr. Pauly's plan would adjust the credit to reflect the family's risk category, not its actual outlays.
The idea of both plans is to set credits generously enough to make basic coverage affordable to everyone. And both plans are designed to impel families to search for low-cost insurance because under neither plan would the tax credit be lowered dollar-for-dollar with the cost of insurance.
That's the theory. The reality is apt to be worse. The Heritage plan rewards a higher credit to families that spend a lot on health care. But that gives families that buy excessive coverage the same tax break as families that pay high premiums because they're high risk. Many experts doubt the plan would drive consumers to low-cost plans.
Dr. Pauly's plan doesn't reward excessive outlays. But it does require the Government to figure out each family's risk category, a Herculean task. And consider the political nightmare of asking taxpayers to fork over extra money to, say, overweight smokers.
There's a second, even more fatal problem with tax-credit plans: They rely on individuals to buy their own coverage. But the complexity of insurance plans makes comparison shopping virtually impossible by anyone other than an experienced professional.
That's why managed competition would prove to be a superior reform. Under this system, Americans would join large groups, usually at work. A sponsor would negotiate with health providers to offer group members a choice of competing managed-care plans, like those provided by health maintenance organizations. Comparing options would be easy because providers would be required to offer
identical
policies; members would need only compare price. And providers would be required to offer everyone coverage at reasonable rates, thereby protecting high-risk members.
The closer one looks, the better managed competition looks. Sponsors of managed care plans improve quality by, for example, concentrating heart surgery in a single hospital, the way experts say cuts down mishaps. This type of shrewd quality control would be virtually impossible under other health care systems.
Proponents of tax-credits argue that under their plan individuals would also gravitate toward group coverage. Perhaps. But the experience of the elderly buying supplements to Medicare shows that individuals are easily, and grotesquely, exploited. And groups that are allowed to pick and choose their members would be biased toward low-risk individuals, piling up the chronically ill in public backup plans that would become increasingly expensive.
Tax-credit plans have attractive features. But they have yet to prove they're feasible. Managed competition remains the best health care fix.
Like other states in the Northeast, New York has been hit hard by the recession. Mr. Cuomo and the legislators must close an $875 million gap in this year's $30 billion budget and a projected $4 billion gap next year.
Considering the furious backlash against tax increases in New Jersey and Connecticut, raising taxes is not politically realistic. That means going after health, education and service programs, which make up close to 75 percent of the budget. The two big spending targets are social services, like welfare and Medicaid, and aid to local school districts.
Senate Republicans would impose almost all the cuts on social services. They propose to save $1.8 billion over 15 months by limiting Medicaid services and curtailing eligibility for welfare. They would reduce welfare grants to poor, unemployed single adults by 20 percent, stringently limit their Medicaid benefits and eliminate emergency assistance for the homeless.
By imposing such severe cuts, the Republicans aim to eliminate the need for cuts in aid to education, one of the plums that legislators take back home. It's true that most school districts suffered budget cuts last December and July. And many have growing enrollments. That's a powerful reason to make school aid cuts judiciously, not to exempt schools altogether.
Gov. Cuomo would spread the pain more fairly than the Republicans. He proposes cutting $1.2 billion from social programs and $840 million from the schools. Mr. Cuomo would limit not only Medicaid benefits for inner-city clients, but also nursing home and long-term care benefits that are used by the middle class.
In cutting school aid, the Governor would use a formula that takes into account each school district's relative wealth, thus easing the burden on poorer districts. That ought to offer some protection to New York City, which already receives less than its fair share of school aid while educating a disproportionate share of students with special needs.
In these tough times, Mr. Cuomo offers a better way to spread the pain than the Senate Republicans.
In 75 percent of the cases, the drug agency estimates, the children of these women would, absent the treatment, have been referred for foster care. In the H.R.A. cases, a sibling would typically have required foster placement as well. Even though some 28 percent of the women fail to stay off drugs, the analysis finds a first-year foster care saving of $22.7 million for the two programs and a cumulative four-year saving of more than $250 million. Since the foster care program is jointly financed by three levels of government, the savings would be shared. These savings will accrue simply from continuing the existing programs. Their expansion to treat all crack mothers in the city would save far more.
The drug policy office prepared these figures in order to argue for restoration of a separate Department of Health program of drug treatment for another 1,200 pregnant women. The argument fell on deaf ears at City Hall, which these days has no money to spare even for promising investments. But there is reason to hope the city drug office's figures will win interest in Washington.
Legislation that remains stalled in Congress would allow Medicaid, the Federal-state health insurance for the poor, to pay for drug treatment programs when addicts are pregnant women, a step that would permit rapid expansion of treatment programs nationwide. The lawmakers have balked at the cost to the Federal Government, estimated at $125 million a year.
Yet the potential national foster care savings, as implied by the programs in New York City, appear sufficient to offset much if not all of that Federal cost -- especially if combined with tens of millions in previously demonstrated Federal savings on special hospital care for addicts' babies. The new arithmetic from New York underscores the need for prompt action when Congress reconvenes.
Instead, Roussel-Uclaf has timidly arranged for large-scale testing in Canada, where the company thinks it is far less likely to face boos and boycotts. Canadian women, then, may well have a useful new therapy for breast cancer within a few years. U.S. drug regulation being very strict, U.S. women will not.
There may be a way, though, for American women to override Roussel-Uclaf's pusillanimity -- and that's by outshouting the "lonely hecklers . . . who should be ignored," in the words of Mayor David Dinkins of New York, who joined 29 other big-city mayors in asking that RU-486 be brought here. Let them take a leaf from the book of those who raise their voices on behalf of people with AIDS.
There are intelligent ways to protest the Food and Drug Administration's "import alert," which was meant to apply only to small personal quantities of the drug but frightened Roussel-Uclaf out of supplying the material for big studies. There are intelligent ways to protest to Congress about the control imposed by a noisy minority over the lives of millions of women.
Her companion, she found out last week, was wrong. According to a 24-week study of 102 women conducted at the Cooper Institute for Aerobics Research in Dallas, women who take 20 minutes to walk a mile have the same increase in "good" cholesterol and the same reduced risk of heart disease as those who take 12 minutes. That's if they walk something like three miles a day five days a week -- no chore at all for confirmed people-watchers, window-shoppers and skyline-gazers.
Not since the good news about olive oil (it lowers the cholesterol level) and garlic (nature's all-purpose gift to humankind) has the woman been so happy. Science, it seems, is finally going her way.
Abruptly, he caught himself: Cut out the melodrama. Yes, heart disease takes getting used to; yes, it's a confusing time. Even so, the silver lining is much bigger than the cloud. There's a lesson here, more than medical, in New Year's resolution.
Angioplasty had sounded dubious: inserting a wire and tiny balloon to press open narrowing heart arteries. But he hadn't really felt pain; a few scratches in the groin where the wire was inserted, then some warm squeezes in the chest. Something like holding your breath. Then, a few awkward hours of lying very still.
Even as heart patients go, he was lucky. He hadn't suffered a heart attack. He hadn't needed open-heart surgery of the kind just undergone by a resolutely cheerful friend. Her triple bypass operation, though successful, could wear out in a few years. "By then," she said gamely, "I'm sure they'll have something else."
And though he knew heart disease is America's biggest killer, he saw clearly why other afflictions, less understood, are more feared. He remembered with awe how acquaintances had fought -- a bright-eyed little girl bravely accepting every esoteric treatment that might stop soft-tissue cancer. A clear-minded young writer who battled AIDS down to his last word. With steel and fury, they had wrested three or four years of life.
People needed no fury to win back many years from heart disease. They could gain ground in a list of ways, like losing weight, eating carefully and not smoking. Medication and/or meditation offered big benefits. Exercise could save lives. By running regularly, a doctor said, he had probably already saved his own life.
56-56-57-57-55.
As the numbers pulsed on, he realized there could hardly be a more positive way to think about the new year. The mistake, as always, is to surrender. Much remains in his power, as in the power of all those everywhere now composing their solemn resolutions. He, and they, can do more than rage against the cruel and the incurable. He, and they, can
earn
a new year. New years. New life.
Girls who smoke, then, are embarking on what may turn out to be, in several ways, a fatal habit; and so are boys. Thus it's good news that the New York City Council is studying a proposed ordinance to make cigarettes a lot less attractive to teen-agers and a lot harder for them to buy.
There are things wrong with the bill. It requires that for every three cigarette advertisements on city-owned property (from subway cars to baseball stadiums) similar space be provided for a free-of-charge anti-smoking advertisement. That avoids infringing on free speech; it constitutes
more
free speech. But there's a good argument that the City Council has no license to force independent authorities to accept public service ads.
A second provision of the bill -- that schools become smoke-free zones for adults as well as students -- depends on cooperation from the United Federation of Teachers.
A third provision would require that sellers and buyers be at least 18 years old. That might make it more difficult to enforce but would at least make it harder for youngsters to buy cigarettes.
Unknotting the tangles, and finding funding for the public service advertisements, may not be easy. But the bill, the proposed Tobacco Product Regulation Act, would create a welcome weapon against a deadly addiction.
Breast implants have been around for 30 years, but no safety testing was required until 1976 when Congress mandated that medical devices be tightly regulated. In 1982 the F.D.A. warned manufacturers that implants would be among the medical devices for which safety data could be required. In 1987 the agency gave specific details about what information would be asked for.
Last July the data were called in and found wanting. Even so, four months later an F.D.A. advisory panel recommended keeping silicone breast implants on the market, at least for awhile. The information provided by four manufacturers, the panel said, was insufficient to show that the implants were safe -- but neither did it prove them to be unsafe. The panel therefore recommended further reviews over a 10-year period.
That seemed reasonable -- but that was before the agency knew about material that has come to light in legal proceedings involving Dow Corning Wright, the largest manufacturer of breast implants. This material is sealed by court order. The agency also made its decision before it learned about internal memorandums between Dow executives. The memos, which have not been officially disclosed, suggest that the company has known for years that the devices may leak or rupture.
Nor, finally, was the F.D.A. aware of a 1977 memo in which a marketing executive admitted that he misled plastic surgeons by assuring them "with crossed fingers" that Dow had an active safety study in progress. New results of studies by rheumatologists linking implants to autoimmune diseases are also surfacing.
Consequently Dr. David Kessler, the F.D.A. Commissioner, will recall the advisory panel within 45 days to consider the new information. It may raise enough concerns to justify banning silicone breast implants -- or may leave their safety neither proved nor disproved. No matter what the findings, however, Dow Corning Wright has a lot to explain.
Blunt warnings on the package tell smokers that their habit causes cancer, heart disease, fetal injury and other life-threatening ills. They also fortify the companies' defenses when sued by dying smokers and their families claiming deceptive marketing. Indeed, juries aren't buying most plaintiffs' cases. But are those warnings immunity cloaks, totally barring civil suits, as well as defenses? If so, manufacturers may be free to undermine the warnings with seductive advertisements -- and keep selling coffin nails without even having to defend themselves in court.
The Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act requires uniform national package warnings and provides that "no requirement or prohibition based on smoking or health shall be imposed" on manufacturers that properly label their packages. It says nothing about civil lawsuits. To read civil lawsuits into the law would require judicial rewriting by justices touted by Presidents Reagan and Bush as dedicated to "interpreting law, not making it."
Normally the Court demands the clearest expression of intent to pre-empt state laws, or a Federal regulatory scheme so pervasive as to occupy the entire legal field. Tobacco makers never asked Congress for such clarity, yet they ask the Court to discover it now. In the name of federalism and judicial restraint, they should not be handed in court something they failed to win in the legislature.
The girl, whose testimony helped build support for the Persian Gulf war, was identified only as "Nayirah," supposedly to protect family members still in Kuwait. Another piece of information was also withheld: that she is not just some Kuwaiti but the daughter of the Kuwaiti Ambassador to the U.S.
Saddam Hussein committed plenty of atrocities, but not, apparently, this one. The teen-ager's accusation, at first verified by Amnesty International, was later refuted by that group as well as by other independent human rights monitors. But the issue is not so much the accuracy of the testimony as the identity and undisclosed bias of the witness.
How did the girl's testimony come about? It was arranged by the big public relations firm of Hill & Knowlton on behalf of a client, the Kuwaiti-sponsored Citizens for a Free Kuwait, which was then pressing Congress for military intervention. Mr. Lantos knew the girl's identity but concealed it from the public and from the other caucus co-chairman, Representative John E. Porter of Illinois.
Mr. Lantos says that the fact that Nayirah is the Ambassador's daughter did not alter her credibility. That doesn't wash. Had her identity been known, her accusations surely would have faced greater skepticism and been questioned more closely. Mr. Porter isn't angered that he was misled. But his complacency is far less troubling than Mr. Lantos's lack of candor and lapse of judgment.
The episode also calls into question the dubious financial dealings of the House caucus system. Unlike Congressional committees, which act on legislation, the caucuses bring together like-minded members to highlight issues like human rights abuses, the environment and minority concerns.
Current rules prohibit the caucuses from accepting private donations or government grants. But the caucuses often have close ties to companion nonprofit "foundations" or "institutes" that attract funds from special interests. Caucus leaders often play a central role in these foundations.
Until recently, for example, Mr. Lantos and Mr. Porter headed the Congressional Human Rights Foundation. It rents space in Hill & Knowlton's Washington headquarters at a reduced rate. The same Citizens for a Free Kuwait that produced the mysterious Nayirah also gave $50,000 to the foundation sometime after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. The foundation has financed caucus travel, including trips by Mr. Lantos and his wife.
Chances are that Congress would have voted to pursue the war even without this deception. Still, it's disappointing that Mr. Lantos, a tiger in pursuing low ethical standards at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, has turned into such a house pet.
In the beginning I thought the furor about breast implants was about breasts. This is convenient. As soon as the discussion focuses on female vanity, sexuality and self-image, attention is diverted from the real issue.
This is not about breasts. This is about business as usual and Dow Corning, a company that manufactures silicone implants and has sold millions of them.
We know that unsatisfactory products are sold all the time. But finding a split seam in your new suit and having a doctor dig stray bits of silicone gel out of your chest wall are two different things. It would be grand to know that those who manufacture body parts hold themselves to a higher standard than the makers of acrylic sweaters.
We have recent history to show us that higher standards are not always met. We have women whose reproductive organs were removed when they were barely past puberty because mothers took a synthetic estrogen during pregnancy that caused cancer in their daughters. We have women who were maimed by an intrauterine device.
We have lived with a negative standard -- not unsafe -- instead of the affirmative standard we deserve.  Some makers of diethylstilbestrol, or DES, still insist there is doubt about whether their miserable product caused cancer. The maker of the Dalkon Shield collapsed into the safe and sheltering arms of bankruptcy still insisting the device, which caused infection, infertility, even death, was safe and effective.
Safe and effective: that's what Dow Corning says about silicone implants. But the Food and Drug Administration has declared a moratorium on their use amid reports of links to a variety of painful inflammatory diseases. Every day there are new allegations that for many years the company ignored compelling questions and did inadequate testing: in other words, that their primary concern was sales, not safety. Some plastic surgeons asked about research years ago. "I assured them, with crossed fingers, that Dow Corning too had an active study under way," a marketing executive wrote.
That was part of a memo that was used when Mrs. Hopkins brought suit.  She told her lawyers she would never settle out of court. She had spent years thinking that there was no link between her painful and debilitating connective tissue disease and the implants that she received after a mastectomy.
And then she began to hear that there were documents that indicated otherwise, but that had been sealed as part of out-of-court settlements. And she got mad. And even.
According to Mrs. Hopkins, Dow Corning's lawyers offered her almost $2 million just before closing arguments. She refused. The jury awarded her $7.3 million, most of it in punitive damages. Whenever she hears Dow Corning officials saying this is much ado about nothing, she remembers that six ordinary people sent the company a message: What you did was wrong.
There are many women who have silicone implants and think they're terrific, although no one knows if they will have problems in years to come. Dow Corning likes to argue that women have a right to implants, a freedom of choice argument that is a good sell.
I'm not buying. Women have a right to implants -- a right to safe ones, rigorously tested with the best interests of people placed before the bottom line. That's what the Food and Drug Administration, which has acted admirably in this case, must deliver in every case, with every product, so that dangers are recognized before damage is done.
We women are not machinery, to be patched together when it turns out the parts don't work, although that's how we've been treated for a long time.  Dow Corning likes to hold up its 30 years of implant sales as evidence of their safety. But I see it differently.  Surely, if the company had cared to, three decades would have given it plenty of time to come up with overwhelming data showing that its product was safe. Unless, of course, it's not.
This all comes to mind with the news that President Bush has been taking powerful benzodiazepene sedation in the form of the prescription drug Halcion when he travels. It was also revealed over a year ago that the Secretary of State, James A. Baker, had been taking Halcion when he went to conferences overseas.
These are scary tidings. Halcion is the most terrifying drug I have ever used, and its effects are incalculably more frightening when they are at work on the President. I have been taking prescription tranquilizers since 1966. I have used almost every kind imaginable: phenothiazines, chlorpromazines and others I cannot recall. But Halcion, a chemical firstcousin to the tranquilizer Xanax, is in a class by itself for mind-altering side effects. It is not a classic sedative, which basically just slow things down. No, benzodiazepenes are described by Halcion's maker, the Upjohn Company, as "anxiolytics," meaning they literally cut the anxiety in your brain.
When Halcion hits you, it's as if an angel of the Lord appears in your bedroom and tells you that nothing is important, that everything you were worried about is happening on Mars and that nirvana, Lethe and the warm arms of mother are all waiting for you. People who have used heroin tell me Halcion is better than heroin for making bad thoughts simply disappear.
The flip side is that in my experience, as in the cases of many men and women I talk with every day in a program that helps people get off drugs, Halcion took up residence in my head. It does not just do its magic and then disappear. Without it, sleep is almost impossible. I felt depressed and often suicidal for days after taking it and more or less permanently depressed if I took it continuously.
It clouds judgment and forecloses careful analysis. It makes the user alternately supremely confident and then panicky with an unnameable dread. It causes intense, truly terrifying forgetfulness, as well as a serene bliss about that forgetfulness.
A friend of mine took a small dose of Halcion -- less than what the President is reported to take -- and then carried a gun through a metal detector at an airport. He had forgotten not only that he had a gun with him but also that guns are illegal at airports. Another friend, a lawyer, repeatedly failed to show up at her own depositions when she had taken Halcion the night before.
Halcion is serious medicine. When the President takes it, it's not just a matter between a civil servant and his physician. It's questionable whether the physician should even prescribe it, considering that it is banned in England and is the subject of major litigation and controversy over its side-effects in the U.S. and around the world.
A President with a chemical between himself and reality is the last thing America needs. It's the plot of a suspense novel, not the stewardship that real life and real problems need.
Wake up, Mr. President, we need you on the job. And if you need the drug to sleep when you travel, maybe you should just stay home.
Benjamin J. Stein is a lawyer, writer and actor.
In the U.S., typically, a company develops a new product, seeks F.D.A. approval to conduct human tests, carries them out and reports the results to the F.D.A.
The F.D.A. almost never does its own testing; that would be impractical and enormously costly. Instead it analyzes the data submitted by the manufacturers and then decides whether to approve marketing. But now come some alarming revelations, from documents that lawyers have been able to obtain in product liability cases.
In the case of breast implants, internal memos and reports from the Dow Corning Corporation, the leading manufacturer, suggest that results of a key animal study were misreported. The company contended in a medical journal that four dogs given implants had remained in normal health whereas one died, another had a benign tumor and two suffered long-lasting inflammation. Both the inaccurate article and the more accurate underlying data appear to have been given to the F.D.A. but the medical profession lacked the correct information.
Other memos suggest the company was desperate to get a new implant on the market and cut corners on testing to do so. After hearing the evidence, a Federal trial jury in December found Dow Corning guilty of fraud in concealing evidence of risks; it awarded an implant patient $7.3 million.
Dow Corning says the memos have been taken out of context and represent the normal give-and-take of decision-making. Maybe so, but it is still shocking that they helped persuade Dr. David Kessler, the Food and Drug Commissioner, to urge a moratorium on implants. A top F.D.A. official accused the company of "clear misrepresentation."
In the case of Halcion, two prominent European critics have similarly accused the Upjohn Company. Dr. Ian Oswald, a Scottish psychiatrist who has conducted analyses for injured plaintiffs, assailed Upjohn for "one long fraud' in concealing adverse effects for 20 years. He accused the company of manipulating test results by dropping patients who had adverse reactions from studies or incorrectly reporting the same reactions in its control groups. His analyses are said to have influenced British regulators to suspend the drug last October.
The company adamantly denies any intentional wrongdoing, accuses its accusers of misrepresentation and admits only to minor clerical errors. The F.D.A. is now conducting a criminal investigation to sort out who is right.
The two cases require vigorous investigation and also the fullest possible disclosure to a confused public. If one or both companies have been falsely accused, they deserve to have their reputations restored. But if one or both have attempted to deceive regulators, doctors or the public, the penalties need to be harsh.
Although abortions performed during the last three months of pregnancy account for only one-tenth of 1 percent of all abortions, there's no escaping the horror that they take place at all. Over the last five years, three women have told me they ended their pregnancies in the third trimester. There were many reasons for the decision, but one was especially chilling: Each feared handing her baby, diagnosed in utero with severe birth defects, over to neonatologists.
Dr. Alan Fleischman, the director of the division of neonatology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, was not surprised to hear it. "As I go around the country and talk to families," he said, "I'm just appalled at the amount of child abuse we're inflicting on neonates."
Enter any neonatal intensive care unit, its isolettes like clear jewel cases, and at first glance all the machines and monitors obscure the person they are there to serve, a baby as small and translucent as a sheet of bond paper. That is what some parents believe has happened; the technology, like a kind of modern dybbuk, has taken control. While concern over the boundaries of medical treatment has focused mainly on the elderly or those with terminal diseases, it seems we have forgotten the littlest patients. And it seems that many doctors have forgotten those patients' parents as well.
Federal "Baby Doe" regulations, which many doctors have seen as a mandate to treat all babies aggressively, no matter how small, how sick or how impaired, have contributed to the problem. So has the difficulty of prognosis; some very small babies can be saved with few ill effects, some die, and some wind up with impairments so profound that their parents say they wish they had not survived.
The result has been that women like those three who had late abortions have come to believe their children will be poked, prodded, tested, examined, ventilated, resuscitated past all reason before they inevitably die. The physician's dictum "First, do no harm" sometimes seems to have been whittled down in neonatal I.C.U.'s to "First, do." For some doctors, climbing the heights of extraordinary means is a little like Everest: they do it because it is there.
"A large number of neonatologists are very aggressive for two reasons," says Dr. Fleischman. "They see themselves as heroes pressing at the threshold of medical technology, and they are inappropriately paranoid that it is not legal to let families make these choices. The result is overtreatment of infants not in their best interests."
One of the recurring motifs in issues of life and death is that each is distinct and most are difficult. But even tough questions demand a search for answers. After years of debate, we finally have Federal law that requires hospitals to ask patients if they want to plan for the worst by filling out a living will or designating a health care proxy.
Now it is time to turn to the conundrums at the other end of the continuum. One study showed that a third of neonatologists were treating babies they believed had nothing to gain.  Another showed that doctors were paying far less attention to what parents wanted for their children. "They told us to get a lawyer," said one woman who wanted her baby's respirator removed. The baby later died, but the parents' anger at doctors who, they believe, treated their daughter only to hone their own skills lives on, mingled with their grief.
Miracles are performed on premature infants every day; neonatal intensive care units are often the beginning of happy endings. And some are extraordinarily sensitive to the wishes of parents and the futility of prolonging certain lives. But when doctors themselves describe treatment as abusive for the tiniest of patients, when parents describe the aggressive treatment of their dying children as intensifying their pain, when some women imagine it would be less painful to abort a handicapped child than have its life prolonged in a hospital, something is horribly wrong.
Until the 1960's, the big hospital complexes were the state's main answer to mental illness. At their peak they housed some 93,000 patients. During deinstitutionalization in the late 60's and early 70's, patients were discharged in huge numbers on the theory that they could be cared for better in the community. By 1980, only 23,000 patients remained hospitalized.
Yet with upstate counties dependent on the hospitals for jobs, they proved as hard to close as the Federal Government's obsolete military bases. Mental health funds that should have followed patients into communities continued to maintain the hospital buildings. Meanwhile, thousands of discharged hospital patients were left to fend for themselves on the streets.
Their plight improved in the mid-1980's when the state and city found money to develop new community residences and pressured city hospitals to make more efficient use of their psychiatric wards. That began the process of bringing some of the homeless mentally ill in from the streets. It also caused a new decline of the upstate hospital population. Today, the 22 hospital campuses with their 1,300 buildings hold only 12,500 patients.
These hospitals need to be consolidated. Many of the buildings are badly deteriorated, and renovations would cost $145,000 per bed. It is foolish to spend that kind of money for beds that aren't needed. And the money saved by downsizing could be used to expand community mental health treatment, making possible yet more reductions of hospital beds.
With that in mind, the state's Mental Health Commissioner, Richard Surles, now proposes closing down Harlem Valley and three other hospitals and consolidating seven more, to handle an eventual population of only 6,000. In addition to the capital savings, such a reduction could yield payroll savings that approach $200 million per year.
The proposal constitutes a historic breakthrough. No previous commissioner, or governor, would have dared risk the political firestorm from communities dependent on hospital campuses.
But there is another sort of political danger here as well. The monies liberated by the closures might simply go to reduce the state's enormous deficit rather than finance more community mental health programs. That danger could be headed off by legislation. Mental health and church groups, for example, are promoting a bill that would designate at least 40 percent of hospital closure savings for community programs next year, rising to 100 percent by 1995.
With the future of community mental health at stake -- and the promise it carries for humanely removing the homeless from the streets -- the concept deserves urgent support.
Historically, conservatives have upheld experience, prudence and tradition, while the left has been devoted to theory. Since the French Revolution, conservatives have cautioned against utopianism, social engineering and bloated bureaucracies; the left, until recent years, has presented a vision of a new, untried society.
Today, on health care the sides are reversed. The right upholds a theory, the free market, which is not applied to health insurance anywhere in the West. Conservative thinkers issue theoretical designs for free market reform and managed competition (related but distinct ideas); when confronted with the record of market failure in health insurance and the disappointing results of market-oriented reforms, they often respond that the true market has yet to be tried, much as some on the left still say true socialism has yet to be tried.
In contrast, liberal critics of our health insurance system are resolutely factual, emphasizing that the U.S. has higher costs, lower coverage and greater dissatisfaction than do countries with national health insurance.
Ordinarily, Americans expect conservatives to support lower-cost alternatives in social policy and liberals to be generous to a fault. But America's high-cost health system finds defenders on the right, which has a tender regard for the insurance and health care industries. It is the liberals who favor the reforms that have enabled Germany and other Western European countries to keep their per capita health spending at half the U.S. level.
Political conflict in the U.S. is commonly said to be more pragmatic than in Europe. But from the earliest campaigns for universal health insurance here, the issue has evoked much sharper ideological differences. European conservatives often introduced national health insurance programs that U.S. conservatives have denounced as socialized medicine.
The debate in the U.S. has been more inflammatory, as proposals for universal insurance have been accused of alien and subversive origins. Such proposals first died in 1918 when they were labeled an insidious German idea. They died again in the 1930's and 1940's amid charges that they were Soviet-inspired. Lately, conservatives have condemned Canada's system as socialism that individualistic Americans could never accept, even though Canadian health care providers are private and Canadians choose freely among them.
Yet while conservative rhetoric counterposing socialism and free choice has remained unchanged, conservative ideas have been transformed. Conservatives once saw the right to choose any doctor as essential to all health plans; now, with health maintenance organizations, they consider that right expendable.
More ironically, many Americans find that the health system restricts their economic liberty in another way: they cannot exchange jobs, for fear of losing coverage of pre-existing medical conditions.
What is puzzling is that in other Western countries with national health insurance, health care is still overwhelmingly private and capitalism is alive and well. A U.S. national health plan that provided universal coverage, squeezed administrative overhead and contained health prices would help employers control costs and broadly benefit the economy.
A public program with options for H.M.O.'s, which liberals generally support, would provide more choice and better managed competition than individual employers can provide.
It is a pity Marxists were wrong about our politics. If capitalism's interests really governed our political life, conservatives would have lost the health insurance battle long ago.  Paul Starr is professor of sociology at Princeton and co-editor of The American Prospect, a quarterly.
I follow the same policy on news stories about science's latest announcements about human diet. With all the misery available in the paper why waste precious time being told again and again what science first told me 75 years ago; to wit, that I am still eating myself into an early grave?
But back to the well-meaning useless advice in "How to Check Insurer Health": As the accompanying story reminded us, the health-insurance industry is infested with deadbeats, finaglers and downright thieves against whom governments give us little protection.
You will understand the Government's reluctance to restrain these rascals if you heard President Bush denounce the evils of regulation in his State of the Union speech last week. What could be worse than letting rip-off artists abuse the sick, the maimed and the dying? Government regulation that would hobble the dynamism of a free market, that's what.
However, Government does keep a drowsy eye on things, so here, according to The Times's advice, is what you can do to check up on a health-insurance operation before you buy:
1. "Call the state insurance department to find out if a plan is licensed in that state and if it contributes to a state guarantee fund."
2. "Look for an insurer that has been in business for three years or more."
3. "If a small insurer contends that its policies are backed by a large insurance company, call the larger company and have its officials explain the relationship and how much protection it offers."
"This advice is useless," says Mr. S. K., of West 92d Street. "Have you ever called an agency of the Government? 'Ask' state regulators -- 'Look' for an insurer -- 'Call' the larger company. . . .
"What older person can do all these things? Those who can afford lots of expensive professional help, and such people don't need this insurance."
Older persons are not the only ones likely to be defeated if they take The Times's advice seriously enough to pick up the phone. Getting anything but a busy signal on the typical Government telephone can require dialing or punching telephone buttons until your fingertips are worn down to your knuckles.
Worse: Suppose you do finally get a human being. You know what happens then, don't you? The only person who can possibly know what you're talking about is taking sick leave. Or is in conference. Or out to lunch. Sure they'll call you back. Sure they will. Sure. Not to worry. No problem.
Let's not even try to imagine the odds against getting through -- on the telephone! -- to a "regulator" willing to give you a critique of the policy you're thinking of buying. I am reminded of an out-of-town friend who asked a subway token-booth attendant how to get to Yankee Stadium. The reply: "You want I should carry you to the Yankee Stadium?"
As for phoning up a large insurance company and reaching somebody willing to explain its relationship with small insurance companies, I will not be cynical. After running up a phone bill that would shame an adolescent you might very well find somebody just below the vice-presidential level at Prudential who is just dying to talk about corporate relationships.
But after listening to the explanation, could you understand it? Of course not. Nobody human can understand insurance talk. That's why lawyers were made.
You want some useful advice? Be so rich you don't need health insurance. Or be miserably poor and live next door to a good teaching hospital. They need a constant supply of people to learn on, and the medicine is top of the line.
These are serious, but remediable flaws. With a few bold strokes, Congress could preserve the vision and correct the errors. The end product might not be ideal, but it would insure that no American need fear bankruptcy just because of illness.
Key elements of the plan include:
Coverage of the poor.
Any poor family needing care would be automatically enrolled in an insurance plan. Families below the poverty line would qualify for a voucher worth up to $3,750 a year. States would be required to make available comprehensive insurance for that amount.
Unfortunately, the credit would be phased out too steeply. Even though the plan would also provide a new deduction for medical costs, near-poor families would still be strapped to pay their bills.
Cost control:
The Bush plan can't control costs unless employees are pressed to choose low-cost plans among options provided by employers. But the White House backed down from the one measure that would work: limiting tax deductions for insurance premiums so that workers would be compelled to shop wisely. This is the plan's fatal flaw. Mr. Bush could have used the tax savings to pay for his $100 billion plan; instead, he made no firm financing proposal. Unless he summons the courage -- presumably after elections -- to cap tax-deductible insurance premiums, his plan crumbles.
Small-business insurance pools:
Small firms have a strong incentive to hire only healthy workers to avoid high insurance costs. Mr. Bush would wisely encourage small employers to band together to buy insurance, but his proposal lacks bite. Small firms that go it alone shouldn't be allowed to write off insurance premiums from taxes.
Protecting the chronically ill:
The Bush plan would forbid insurers from shunning the sickest people. But enforcing such regulations is notoriously difficult. The plan would cleverly overcome resistance, by requiring insurers who enroll individuals likely to be healthy -- say, young non-smokers -- to pay a small tax that would be used to compensate insurers who enroll individuals likely to become chronically ill, like the elderly.
Encouraging managed care:
Mr. Bush accepts the idea that managed-care plans, run by sophisticated buyers, are best able to control costs and monitor quality. He wisely proposes to pre-empt state laws that stymie managed care. He would also provide financial incentives for the elderly to join health maintenance organizations and for the states to set up cost-effective H.M.O.'s for their Medicaid population.
It's easy to pick out flaws. The plan doesn't cover long-term care or adequately adjust vouchers for inflation or regional differences in costs. But the overarching vision is right: protect the poor and encourage cost-effective managed care. What's needed now is the guts to enforce the vision.
But Dr. Sullivan, who is Secretary of Health and Human Services, surely knows better. Fetal tissue is far from scarce -- there are over one million abortions in the United States every year -- so there is little demand for more. And any possible financial incentive for ending a pregnancy can be eliminated, as two Federal panels advised in 1988, by amending the law that bans the sale of human organs to ban the sale of fetal tissue as well.
Another unlikely prospect -- that some women might deliberately become pregnant and then abort to provide fetal tissue for an ailing relation -- can be guarded against. The same Federal panels recommended a ban on Federal funding of experimental transplants performed with fetal tissue provided by a patient's family or friends.
Never mind what the panels said; the Administration appears determined to prevent research that could save countless lives. For a President who proclaims himself pro-life, this is an irony indeed.
The commission, chaired by Andrew Cuomo, rightly observes that "the dearth of current, reliable information" feeds "the superficiality of public debate" on the homeless issue. The group therefore marshaled resources of Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, the City University's Center for Social Research and the Brookdale Hospital Medical Center to conduct an extensive, and apparently ground-breaking, survey.
The researchers found some 22 percent of single shelter residents with histories of mental health problems, a figure that surely understates the extent of mental illness among the homeless; many of the mentally ill fear and thus avoid the shelters.
The most striking finding concerned substance abuse. When questioned by researchers, 43 percent of single shelter residents admitted abusing alcohol daily or drugs monthly. When the researchers conducted urine tests, the number rose to 65 percent. Those figures greatly exceeded previous estimates.
The researchers found the highest level of drug abuse, 80 percent, in the city's primitive armory shelters. These places, providing virtually no social services, now cost taxpayers a scandalous $18,000 per year per drill-floor bed -- as much as residential drug treatment. When researchers asked the drug abusers if they would participate in rehabilitation programs, 85 percent said yes.
Therein lies the message for Washington, where officials have long noted high rates of drug abuse, revealed by urinalysis, among criminal suspects under arrest. Those arrest figures, along with research documenting the success of court-ordered drug treatment, support the need for spending more on treatment to reduce crime. Now, with its finding on drug abuse in shelters, the Cuomo commission confirms that more treatment might efficiently reduce homelessness as well.
In New York, severe fiscal pressures on both the city and state limit the possibilities. The Cuomo commission recommends no higher spending, only shifting existing resources to more productive spending on treatment and other services. Any substantial increase will have to come from Washington. For candidates concerned about the quality of life in urban America, an intelligent opportunity awaits.
Second, the cancer issue, involving a dread disease, could make him vulnerable to hardball politics. Should Mr. Tsongas keep winning on the way to the convention, the Democratic Party will need to put any questions to rest quickly.
Mr. Tsongas was diagnosed in 1983 as suffering from non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a cancer of the infection-fighting lymphatic system. His was a low-grade small-cell lymphoma detected at Stage IV-A, when some cancerous cells had already reached his bone marrow. This kind of cancer, though often fatal, is "indolent"; it can take many years to do real damage. So doctors at first waited and watched, then used an oral anti-cancer drug.
But by 1986, his symptoms were getting worse, so Mr. Tsongas underwent a radical procedure -- a bone marrow transplant -- that offered the first real hope of cure. Conventional treatments typically failed because the doses of drugs or radiation that could be tolerated by the body never quite eradicated the last trace of cancer; it eventually returned. But with the new procedure, bone marrow was extracted and the patient was subjected to huge doses of drugs and full-body radiation. Then the marrow was put back, reconstituting the immune system.
Mr. Tsongas has been free of all traces of cancer ever since. That's five and a half years of survival, disease-free as determined by the most sophisticated tests available. Does that mean he is cured for good? Or at least reasonably sure to be free of recurrence for the Presidential terms?
His own doctors are convinced that he is. "In my gut, I'd say there is very little chance of recurrence," says Dr. Tak Takvorian. That is not just bravado for public consumption; it is the corridor consensus among professionals at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, where Mr. Tsongas was treated. Cancer experts at other institutions tend to agree.
That doesn't erase all expert doubt. There's still room to wonder if, even after the heroic bone marrow advances, the stubborn tumor might ultimately reappear.
The question cannot be answered with certainty; the bone marrow procedure is too new to have yielded long-term survival data. But if Mr. Tsongas remains a front-runner, steps could be taken to get a firmer fix. Scientists could search all bone marrow studies for data on the patients most comparable. And his doctors' projections could be vetted by independent experts.
Mr. Tsongas presumably faces at least some small risk of recurrence. But his is not the only risk. Cancer is more likely the older one gets. President Reagan was treated for colon cancer and skin cancer while in office. President Bush, at 67, is in a riskier age group than Mr. Tsongas, at 51. There are obvious differences between them that voters may be called on to assess, but on present evidence, cancer is not one of them.
Parents in the former Soviet Union do not have this assurance. The new commonwealth can produce only 15 to 20 percent of the medical supplies it needs, and it does not have enough hard currency to import them. In addition, a frighteningly large proportion of medical personnel are not well trained. Most hospitals are filthy, dark and cold. Equipment breaks down and cannot be replaced.
Aid is forthcoming, but the need is so great that more is required. America is joining other industrialized democracies in helping at governmental and private levels. Through the U.S. Provide Hope project, planes are taking supplies to the new commonwealth. Now, through the privately run Russian Winter Campaign, American governors are mobilizing to send at least one planeload each (about 100 tons per trip) of medicine and food in the next 60 to 90 days.
Beginning next week, Soviet and U.S. military cargo planes will transport some supplies, with the U.S. Government supporting the effort by covering fuel and transportation costs. When all is said and done, the private sector will probably end up delivering twice the amount of needed relief as the U.S. Government.
At stake is not just saving human lives, but strengthening democracy in the new commonwealth. The medical conditions, and the critical need they reflect, indicate a deeper political healing process that must take place.
Health care facilities are contributing to the spread of hepatitis B and H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.  Because of shortages, medical workers are forced to re-use syringes and needles, and they lack sterilization equipment. Because of this, parents are choosing not to have their children immunized. Moreover, the World Health Organization recently tested the 40 vaccines produced in the commonwealth and found 27 of them to be "unfit for human or animal use." Vaccines are often stored past their effective dates and without refrigeration.
According to Murray Feshbach, professor of population studies at Georgetown University, 95 percent of a population must be vaccinated against a disease to prevent an epidemic. Soviet children, many already suffering from vitamin deficiency and the effects of environmental degradation, are vulnerable to the spread of infectious disease. We know that in 1989 one-quarter of Soviet children who should have been vaccinated against polio were not; one-fifth were not immunized against diphtheria, and one third did not get a whooping cough vaccination.
The incidence of infectious diseases in the former Soviet Union is already much higher than in the West. Some 120,000 new cases of tuberculosis have been reported annually in the Soviet Union. In 1990, 312 people were reported to have developed polio, a disease virtually wiped out in the U.S. Seven hundred cases of diphtheria were reported in Moscow alone in 1990, compared with one to three cases a year in the entire United States. A breakdown in sanitation may be responsible for more deaths related to paratyphoid, typhoid and hepatitis A.
The people of the former Soviet Union have inspired the world with their courage in struggling to create a stable democracy out of the ruin of Communism. These same people need our assistance now to help them keep their children alive and healthy.
To balk at providing assistance at a time of desperate need could doom the fragile democracy and the peaceful world order. The children of the former Soviet Union, to whom we can give the gift of life, and our own children, to whom we can give the gift of peace, deserve no less.
Arthur Hartman, U.S. Ambassador to the Soviet Union from 1981 to 1988, is a member of the Russian Winter Campaign international committee.
Sex education in the 90's is complicated. Because my sons look upon my person the way I looked upon a transparent plastic model called The Visible Woman when I was a kid, they have asked many incisive questions about human reproduction, often in crowded trains while commuters strained for my explanation as though we were all in an E. F. Hutton ad. After their sister was born, they stared at her on the changing table as though they were at the drive-in and she was the screen.
Condoms, puberty, infertility: we've tackled the mechanics of them all. Sex education is good. So we are educating about sex.
But sometimes I feel as if I'm teaching geometry instead of something infinitely more intimate. I worry that in explaining sex technically, we fail to capture its essential humanity, even its sexiness. The parents of adolescents grimace at this.  That last part, they say, the kids figure out for themselves.
Well, yes and no. I sat recently with a group of young women in their 20's and was struck by the difference between how they saw their sex lives and how my friends had seen theirs 15 years ago. The difference was fear. The younger women were looking for Mr. Right and Mr. Wrong at the same time. In the age of AIDS, trust was an outmoded luxury and sex sounded much like Russian roulette. One woman had had a brief encounter with a fellow student and hadn't stopped worrying about it until she gave blood and passed the routine H.I.V. screening. "I will never, ever, ever do that again," she said grimly.
These women did not invent the nexus of sex and fear. I've heard about it from women older than I am, women whose contraception consisted of the mantra "Oh, God, don't let me get pregnant." I've heard about the sexual encounters that led to marriage to a relative stranger.
Somewhere between now and then were those of us who grew up after the pill but before AIDS was a household acronym. The time was called the sexual revolution, which overstated the case. But in retrospect it does seem revolutionary, this freedom from fear, this freedom to make a mistake and not pay for it with your life, one way or the other. Sometimes I feel as if we grew up between two times of sexual peril, like someone too young to be drafted into one war and too old for the next.
We learned about ourselves through trial and error, and there was plenty of the latter. It made some people crazy, this freedom: retributive sex has always been a popular prejudice, from homes for wayward girls to AIDS as a spurious validation for homophobia.
It's why some of our mothers talked about sex as a pitfall, not a pleasure. And our kids talk about pitfalls, too, the one they know from public service messages and Magic Johnson and a favorite uncle, who got thinner and thinner and at last disappeared. Their burgeoning new world of sexuality already has fear edging the horizon.
The other night my son was watching a documentary called "The Miracle of Life," which follows the seed and the egg up close and personal.  (Up very close -- the Fallopian tubes get pretty scary.) He was cheering the seed on, as though conception were a cross between the Super Bowl and Super Mario Brothers, and then he said triumphantly, "That's how I started out."
I was glad that he saw himself as part of the process; perhaps that is what I fear gets lost in all the logistics. We all know there's a lot more to this than 28-day cycles and the vas deferens. There's biology, it's true, but there's also psychology, humanity, morality. The seed and the egg.  Sex and death. And love, of course. Nobody said this was going to be easy. It's not.
They are impatient with a man who has flipped on taxes and flopped on the environment. Ronald Reagan denies having said that Mr. Bush "doesn't seem to stand for anything," but in substance it's not an alien thought. Voters find it hard to tell poll takers just what Mr. Bush intends to accomplish in a second term.
In truth, many Americans don't care all that much about grand visions. They do care whether the man in charge offers answers to real challenges. Here are three ways in which Mr. Bush might address that yearning for direction. None would bend his basic instincts out of shape; each would play to his strengths as a negotiator.
Seize the Peace Dividend. The Administration proposes to cut $50 billion in military spending over the next five years. Representative Les Aspin, a Democrat, would cut twice that. The Pentagon has not yet demonstrated why Mr. Bush could not move just as fast -- and seize the issue.
He could also lay out now an intelligent plan for using the money to enhance savings, investment and long-term economic growth. There are obvious candidates, starting with kids and concrete. Such a proposal would help the economy grow, unlike the phony tax fixes he has so far proposed. And it would go a long way toward giving his Presidency the definition it now lacks.
Save the Russians. Why worry about foreigners when America's in trouble? Because everyone, Americans included, stands to lose if the old Soviet Union explodes. If it does, spending for military contingencies would eat up some of the peace dividend. And a huge potential market for American goods would dissipate. Congress has been conspicuously sluggish on helping the republics survive another winter. Here again is an issue begging for Presidential leadership.
Come Clean on Health Care. Mr. Bush's health care plan includes several creative proposals to cover poor families and make the system more efficient. What's missing is an honest way to control costs. It's no mystery: Limit the tax deductibility of employer-paid insurance premiums. Mr. Bush likes the idea but doesn't want to push it until after the election. A little candid courage now would make half a plan nearly whole.
With an affirmative program, the President would be better positioned to treat Patrick Buchanan for what he is: a godsend. Mr. Buchanan's neo-isolationist foreign policy provides an excellent foil for the robust internationalism that comes naturally to Mr. Bush. And Mr. Buchanan's baiting of minorities provides the opportunity for Mr. Bush to champion decent values.
All this may not be enough. But it's more than the disconnected bits and pieces that President Bush is trying, with diminishing success, to pass off as serious policy. Many Americans will agree to stay the course, but first they have to know what it is.
Doctors who continue to sign blanket "as needed" O.K.'s for the use of restraints would, in the future, be breaking the law. Since many doctors proved lax in the past, all doctors would now be required to explain why restraints are needed and, most important, specify when they are to come off.
Restraints, the rules reaffirm, are not medicine; they do nothing for the symptoms. Under the new rules, nursing homes filing restraint reports would have to prove that they had first explored every alternative. They would also have to submit a plan outlining steps to enable the patient to shuck the restraints as quickly as possible.
The toughest of the new rules tackle drug use. A doctor's order to use drugs as a restraint would expire in 12 hours and in most cases would require the patient's approval. The new law would also outlaw the growing use of antihistamines that deliberately keep nursing home patients sluggish. Their popularity grew when nursing home aides discovered that they were not covered by previous restrictions.
The new rules still permit restraints in an emergency to insure the physical safety of the patient and others, or, in the case of drugs, to treat real medical symptoms. The rules could greatly improve the quality of life for many nursing home patients. But given the past record, it's still too early to cheer.
Helpless ancients dumped at hospitals haven't much interested the press before now, but a granny left at a dog track was a story too bizarre to ignore, and it got big play across the country. Thus I was forced to dwell on it at the very moment the posturing of the Presidential candidates was at one of its seasonal peaks.
Former Governor Brown was dilating on the miracles that would flow from a 13 percent flat tax, with blithe disregard for the fact that George Washington himself, risen from the tomb for the specific purpose, could not persuade any Congress -- Democratic, Republican, Whig, Federalist, Tory or Milk-of-Human-Kindness Party -- to enact a flat tax.
Governor Clinton, instead of dismissing Brown's tax promise as irrelevant to real life -- granny dumping, e.g. -- was accepting the Brown theory that most voters are too dim to grasp basic political realities, like Congress's sovereignty in tax matters. So there he was, gravely denouncing the soak-the-poor nature of all flat taxes as though Brown's might really be enacted.
No wonder so many voters were saying there had to be somebody better than this crowd. The nation is jogging, eating broccoli, losing weight, throwing tantrums every time somebody lights up a smoke in the next county, and what will be its reward when this heroism has carried it safely into grannyhood? The rising probability is that it will be granny-dumped.
Contemplating that future -- that bag of diapers, that "Proud To Be An American" sweatshirt, those dog trainers or supermarket stock clerks or Disneyland Mickey Mouse impersonators saying, "Poor old granny, he doesn't even know his own name" -- contemplating that was no easier after checking the Bush camp. There, as among the Democrats, it was politics as usual: strict loyalty to the faith that you can fool enough of the people enough of the time to be elected President.
Granny-dumping hadn't come to the attention of Presidential speech writers in January when they composed the State of the Union address, but even then the press told tales of the death of civilization. People sleeping on the streets. Terrorists rampant in filthy, ruined cities. Bankruptive health care, and none at all for millions.
Never mind. The President's January speech had dared Democrats to do many vaguely defined things he knew they would not do, and he challenged them to do them by March 20, or else get campaigned against for not doing them.
In short, while pretending to provide us with the governance services for which we pay him, he was posturing for re-election. Congressional Democrats, equally masterful at striking poses, quickly passed a tax bill they knew the President would veto. It offered small coin to this year's favorite undefinable mass, "the middle class." Mr. Bush then danced the next step in this fakers' minuet by vetoing it.
Now they will argue about who most loves the middle class, each boasting of his own role in this stale piece of political bamboozlement as evidence of statesmanship.
Contemplating the possibility of being granny-dumped, there in the wheelchair, holding the bag of diapers, "Proud To Be An American," I wonder if our politicians might be numb to furies seething among Americans as Eastern Europe's rulers were numb to the passions that undid Leninism.
Wake and look, gentlemen. There's trouble out here. People sleeping in the streets. Terrorists killing for fun, money and revenge in filthy, ruined cities. Millions with no medicine, no doctor. The desperate young are abandoning helpless, hopeless Granny.
Some indignation must be voiced, some conviction about public morality expressed, some principles articulated. "Electability" is a shabby substitute for the passion that hates seeing the old county poorhouse revived as a dog track.
Social workers call this phenomenon "granny dumping." But they are reluctant to condemn those who do the dumping. Instead, they paint a harrowing portrait of millions of Americans who are near the breaking point with the burden of caring for their ill and elderly parents. One in five families now takes care of an elderly parent. Millions of American women will care for their aging parents longer than they care for their own children.
Nobody yet knows all the pressures that led John Kingery's daughter Sue Gifford to check him out of a nursing home and, presumably, leave him at the track. Nor is it known whether the family first explored all avenues of financial and social assistance. But in all too many cases, the care-giving children feel overwhelmed by mounting bills, bureaucratic hassles, hopelessness. The burden falls heavily on female relatives; three of four people caring for the elderly are women.
When the illness is Alzheimer's, care-givers often veer from despair to burnout. Alzheimer's patients can live 20 years in a state of dementia. They require round-the-clock social rather than medical care. Thus, they are usually best cared for at home, by family and publicly funded care-givers. In New York State, some 40,000 older adults, many with Alzheimer's, are cared for at home with Government help. That eases the burden on care-givers without lifting it.
But until Alzheimer's is cured or a long-term health care program is available, the Sue Giffords of America will be as much the victims of an aging population as the John Kingerys.
Ms. Campo and Mr. Pearson had many supporters, among them several physicians. And as one medical ethicist saw it, Theresa Ann had "more in common with a fish."
To Judge Estella Moriarty of Circuit Court, however, Theresa Ann was a human being entitled to equal protection under the law. Under Florida law death cannot be declared until all brain activity has ceased, including the brain stem. "I can't authorize someone to take your baby's life, however short, however unsatisfactory, to save another child," she said. "Death is a fact, not an opinion." A higher court supported Judge Moriarty's opinion; and the State Supreme Court refused to take the case. Yesterday her parents' attorneys brought the case back to a state appeals court. Meanwhile Theresa Ann's life support had been removed, and she died in the late afternoon.
It's tempting, all right: this idea of transplanting organs that are useless to a baby like Theresa Ann to a baby whose life they might save. But it is also horrific: this turning of a baby into a farm to be harvested for organs while she is still alive. True, she could not know or feel; she could not experience her own tragedy. But the rest of us can. If we deny Theresa Ann Campo Pearson her humanity, then we have also denied our own.
At Aware Woman, it is pretty ordinary. Ms. Moran got off easier than the teen-ager whose envelope was sent to her parents. And her experience pales in comparison to that of doctors who receive middle-of-the-night hang-up calls on their unlisted lines and whose homes are picketed constantly.  Opponents of the Melbourne clinic have issued WANTED posters, offering a $1,000 reward for information leading to "the arrest or conviction" of one doctor who works there.
The poster, which describes him as "a hired assassin in that he kills unborn babies for a fee," includes his photograph, his home phone number and that of his mother, and the license-plate number of his car. The poster was taped to the office doors of other gynecologists in central Florida; written at the bottom was "You Are Next."
Today in Washington, D.C., there will be a rally for abortion rights, for constitutional protections and Federal legislation. But while we have been looking at the big picture we have forgotten something important.  What if they gave us abortion, and nobody came -- no doctors, no clinic administrators, no nurses?
The people who run abortion clinics are a tightly knit group, as folks who are under fire tend to be. Their carpenters have been persuaded not to make repairs, their medical labs to turn away their business. Their children have been accosted and told that they are the spawn of murderers. I couldn't blame any of them if they decided that they'd had enough of being the real people behind the legal arguments.
You can find the place where the founder of the Melbourne clinic lives because there is a groove in the grass out front, where every morning a woman walks back and forth with a sign that says "Pat Windle, Stop Killing God's Babies."
Few new doctors are learning to perform abortions, and those who do, concerned that publicity like the Wanted posters will ruin their practices, often return to the happier task of delivering babies. The big medical organizations, which can lobby like nobody's business when they want, have been uncommonly low-key. They were more fired up about our right to choose breast implants than they have ever been about our right to choose abortion.
Ms. Windle says that a reporter scoffed when she described this as a civil war. But it is a war, and there is battle fatigue. There has sprung up a thirst for some middle ground. Sometimes the talk is of promoting contraception, sometimes of curtailing the period of pregnancy during which abortion is permissible, sometimes of merely allowing abortion while making clear that it is not desirable.
But this battle is not being driven by those with a will to compromise. The people who are harassing doctors, patients and clinics consider any means permissible in their quest to prove that they know what's better for you than you do. The ordinary American standards of personal privacy and personal property don't apply. "God's law is higher than man's law," says Randall Terry, the leader of Operation Rescue, who said in Buffalo that he would be using investigators to dig up dirt on doctors who perform abortions, a part of God's law that I missed in my study of the Bible.
And so it is important today to remember a T-shirt slogan: Think Globally, Act Locally. Many of us who speak out in favor of legal abortion have had little to do with the day-to-day happenings at the clinics, perhaps because we were focused on sweeping safeguards, perhaps because it is easier to see abortion as a crusade than as a business. The truth is it must be both. Freedom of the press is only as meaningful as the willingness of one person to publish a newspaper. The right to choose abortion is empty if the people who provide it are harassed out of existence.
Chances are, if you could ask someone in Caesar's Rome or Herod's Jerusalem or Henry VIII's London what they remembered about their cities, they'd talk about the guy who sold oranges on the corner or the woman who walked her dog every day at 3. It is only human, surrounded by a city, to bring it down to scale. The man who sold pencils on Fifth Avenue may have felt overlooked. It's a small comfort surely, but today he knows better.
Mr. Ashe contracted the virus in a way that would gain the sympathy of even the most censorious citizen -- through a blood transfusion after surgery. But even he felt obliged to hide his illness. As he explained Wednesday, AIDS would stigmatize him in a way that his past heart surgeries and brain infection had not, interfering with his ability to continue his activities unhampered.
Most worrisome was the potential impact on his 5-year-old daughter, who may now have to face "new, different and sometimes cruel comments," he said. "The quality of one's life changes irrevocably when something like this becomes public," Mr. Ashe lamented.
Now the truth is out and Mr. Ashe, his hand forced by events, says he may turn his formidable talent for advocacy to the AIDS issue. The nation would benefit if he can find the time and energy to do so.
A few well-placed overhead smashes from Mr. Ashe might well energize the nation's response to AIDS -- and could help change the ignorant attitudes that forced him underground.
Welcome to Journalism 2001. Anyone who tries to make readers believe the questions are simple ones, who automatically invokes freedom of the press and the public's right to know, is doing a disservice to America's newspapers and straining the credulity of its people. Naming rape victims.  Outing gay people. The candidate's sex life. The candidate's drug use. Editors are making decisions they have never made before, on deadline, with only hours to spare, with competitors breathing down their necks.
I am disquieted by the Arthur Ashe story. I can't help but feel that in the medical sense we outed him, a practice that, in the sexual sense, I deplore. That's the human being talking. The reporter understands: public figure, big news. An editor argued rather persuasively on television that if Mr. Ashe had been in a car accident or been hospitalized for cancer, we would have written about it.
But listening to those arguments was like listening to others I'd heard not so long ago. We publish the names of victims of muggings, of murder; why not the names of victims of rape? The answer is that rape is not like other crimes. There are good arguments to be made that our newspapers shape our mind-set, and that by withholding the names of rape victims we perpetuate the stigma.  You can make the same argument about reporting AIDS. But, like rape, perhaps the victims of this illness deserve some special privacy.
Privacy, privacy. The white light of the press and the closed doors of our homes are two of the most deeply prized aspects of our lives as Americans. It just so happens that, just like those two little cartoon characters, they are often in direct opposition to each other.
Is Arthur Ashe still a public figure, this many years after his days at center court? If he is, need we know the medical condition of every public figure? If we are entitled to reveal a reluctant patient, what about a reluctant gay person? What are the parameters? Mr. Ashe argued eloquently that he was neither running for office nor running a corporation, and that his health was no one's concern but his own. At a convention of newspaper editors, my colleagues argued otherwise.
I don't usually put this many questions in a column, but it's questioning that is going to serve the press best. Actually, there is no "the press." We are a collection of men and women, the good, the bad and the nondescript. We know the dangers of knowing too little: we remember the Kennedy assassination, Watergate, Vietnam and, more recently, the arid historical record of the Persian Gulf war.
We know about the man who was a member of the American Nazi Party and a leader of the Ku Klux Klan, who, in the face of a story that he had been born and raised a Jew, committed suicide. It was a very good story; the hypothetical is always whether you'd publish it, knowing the aftermath.
We tell people what we think they need to know. We hurt people, sometimes without reason. Sometimes we are kind. Mr. Ashe described a "silent and generous conspiracy to assist me in maintaining my privacy" on the part of some reporters. I would have joined up. This story makes me queasy. Perhaps it is the disparity between the value of the information conveyed and the magnitude of the pain inflicted.
But kindness is not the point. Information is the point of the product, and questioning the point of the process. We are making a lot of this up as we go along. In the newspaper business we assume certainty; when you spell Steven with a "v" it is because you know that's how Steven spells it. But we are moving these days into areas of great uncertainty. Arthur Ashe has already begun to turn his exposure into education. I hope we manage to do the same.
The chapter's main purpose -- to encourage "frankness between parents and children about sexual behavior" -- is certainly laudable and clearly inoffensive. Its language is hardly steamy. Yet a nervous Federal employee thought people would take offense.
Never mind that by the age of 17 the majority of American teen-agers have had sexual intercourse. That more than a million teen-agers get pregnant every year, and that they account for 25 percent of the abortion rate. That AIDS is now the sixth-leading cause of death among people 15 to 24 years old. Never mind any of that. For the last 12 years, two Administrations have been paralyzed by the notion that telling kids what they need to know is somehow offensive.
Offensive to whom? Surely not the 16-year-old who's H.I.V.-positive because he didn't understand the consequences of unprotected sex. Surely not the 14-year-old who just had a baby because she thought the first time didn't count. No, the people whose feelings are feared are those who think the right response to adolescent sex is to wag a stern finger.
The Reagan Administration caved first, promulgating the "squeal rule," under which parents were to be notified if their children asked for contraceptive advice at federally funded family-planning clinics. The Bush Administration caved when it canceled a study of teen-age attitudes because the study included questions about contraception and sexual behavior. It caved again when it dallied for three years before distributing a brochure about condoms.
And now it deletes a six-page discussion of contraception and sexuality -- a discussion as innocuous as it is informative. True, some Americans are alarmed by such discussions. But all Americans, including Curt Smith's superiors, should be more alarmed by young pregnancies and young deaths.
Naomi is my wife. She would not have survived and have hopes for recovery without 24-hour-a-day nursing. But on March 23, I opened a certified letter from the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company to discover that in 30 days it would cut her nursing to four hours a day. No reason was given.
Her doctor objected. "Without 24-hour care, her condition will surely degenerate." he wrote. "Minimally, she runs a high risk of never being able to recover. Maximally, she runs a high risk of dying." How, he asked, could a visiting nurse on a four-hour shift monitor her for the recurrence of pulmonary embolisms, check her swallowing during meals and perform emergency suctioning to clear the air passage, administer intravenous gamma globulin over several hours and give two injections six to eight hours apart? "It is inconceivable that these services could be provided without full-time, 24-hour-a-day skilled nursing care," he wrote. "Cut those hours and you put her life at risk."
My lawyer tells me that if Naomi dies as a result of a cutback, the company may well be liable for civil and criminal action.
And if Naomi dies, she will be the victim of what is called managed care. At its most benign, it can reduce unnecessary hospital stays and improve patient care by trading home care for hospital days, for example. In fact, it enables Metropolitan Life to overrule physicians' judgments. The term is a euphemism for aggressive cost-cutting. For the $5,200 a year Naomi and I and the state pay Metropolitan, we are well covered by average standards. The cost of nursing is, of course, far higher than our premiums. But that's why people buy insurance.
In days of spiraling health costs, managed care is in political vogue. It corrupts the medical and nursing professions: Insurers pay M.D.'s, and R.N.'s, with Orwellian titles like "utilization reviewer," to reduce services. For medical professionals who are supposedly committed to preserving life, this should be an ethical problem. From Naomi's perspective, it is as if doctors were accepting payment to give lethal injections.
Death comes to the door in strange forms: A soft-voiced nurse, a k a utilization reviewer, offers to fly up from South Carolina and evaluate Naomi for "quality of care and cost effectiveness." This service, she writes, "is provided for you through Metropolitan Life." Although Metropolitan pays her, she calls herself "an objective third-party person." The service, she says, is voluntary. But if you refuse, they cut off your payments.
She did not come because my wife's faculty union, United University Professions, which has stood behind us, advised us to defer her visit while it discussed the case with the Governor's Office of Employee Relations, which can direct the carrier to pay claims to a state employee, and with Metropolitan.
The company declines to release the guidelines it uses to overrule doctors, perhaps because they mix medical and financial criteria and are arbitrary, leaving the carrier with discretion to decide "on a case-by-case basis." Despite great efforts by the union and myself, Metropolitan has never defined the evaluation process, and the Governor's Office of Employee Relations has supported it in its refusal.
Why has Metropolitan cut Naomi's care so drastically? In addition to the nationwide move toward managed care, it appears to me there is an element of retaliation. From 1984 through 1990, reviews took place once or twice a year; in 1991, they were stepped up, and after we complained to the union last December about the multiple reviews, the company initiated still another one, by its South Carolina-based utilization reviewer.
In February, the company suspended payment for a month without explanation, and last month it launched its latest review, by "an independent physician review group" (also paid for by Metropolitan), and then gave notice of the cut in care.
Shortly before Metropolitan's certified letter arrived, we learned of studies confirming the efficacy of a new drug, Ampligen, which may greatly help those who suffer from chronic fatigue syndrome. If Naomi can survive, she may be able to get into the next round of trials authorized by the Food and Drug Administration.
Jesse Lemisch is professor of history at John Jay College of Criminal Justice of the City University of New York.
Furthermore, the $2 billion cost of caring for those babies represents about 57 percent of the costs incurred for all newborns. A good part of the money America spends on health care, more per capita than any other nation, is thus used to remedy what might have been prevented. America ranks a humiliating 22d in the number of infants who die before age 1, and 31st in low-birth-weight babies.
One reason for this sad record is the chaotic fragmentation of medical care for poor pregnant women. Ideally, a woman should be able to enter a system that provides everything from prenatal care to immunizations at a single point. A second reason is that about one in five pregnant women uses illegal substances during pregnancy.
Their pregnancies involve AIDS; about a third of the infants born to H.I.V.-positive mothers will develop the disease by 18 months. They involve syphilis; cases have increased by 64 percent in four years. They involve teen-age mothers. Infants born to adolescents are at great risk because their mothers are likely to be poor and not likely to seek early medical care.
Many of the deaths this report talks about would be preventable -- if early prenatal care and substance abuse treatment were available to all who need it. This is a report that could, if read, save America thousands of lives and billions of dollars.
Under this plan, individuals would be organized into large groups -- usually at work -- and represented by a sophisticated buyer, called a sponsor. The sponsor would solicit bids from competing insurance companies and health care providers. The idea is to control costs through tightly managed competition, rather than price controls, thereby preserving the crowning glory of U.S. health care: its endless capacity for innovation. Dr. Ellwood and friends have spent 25 years working out each of the details.
The Sponsors.
They would standardize the contracts that insurers offer members so the members could choose simply, and wisely, on the basis of lowest price. Sponsors would monitor treatment outcomes and prevent discrimination against the chronically ill.
Under the plan, sponsors would be able to improve care in ways individuals could not on their own. They would, for example, concentrate specific procedures, like heart bypass surgery, in a particular regional hospital -- the best way, studies show, to cut down mishaps.
The idea of sponsors isn't new. The Federal Government runs a sponsored program for its employees, offering a choice of about 400 different plans. But the Federal program is only partly successful because it hasn't followed sensible rules outlined by Jackson Hole.
Tax Consequences.
Jackson Hole-compatible plans require two changes in Federal tax law. They would limit how much in the way of premiums employers are allowed to provide tax-free. Currently, employer-paid premiums are fully deductible, no matter how wasteful. By imposing a tax cap, employers and employees would be encouraged to choose low-cost managed care plans, like health maintenance organizations, over high-cost fee-for-service plans. Under managed care, providers are paid capitated fees independent of how many services they actually provide. That's an important brake on runaway billings.
Second, Jackson Hole-compatible plans would deny tax deductibility to small employers that refuse to join large groups to buy medical insurance. Small employers going it alone pay premiums according to their claims, compelling them to discriminate against job applicants who seem likely to become chronically ill.
For nearly 25 years, the Jackson Hole gang had little to show for its thoughtful work. But suddenly, the ground is starting to shake.
In January John Garamendi, California's Insurance Commissioner, proposed a Jackson Hole-compatible plan that would include every Californian and could be instituted with only minimal help from Washington.
At the Federal level, Representative Jim Cooper, Democrat of Tennessee, has announced a Jackson Hole-compatible plan that limits tax deductions to the cost of basic coverage. Small businesses that refuse to join a large purchasing group would be denied tax-deductible insurance. Universal coverage would be provided by transforming Medicaid into a managed care program for every uninsured American.
The longer Congress keeps looking vainly to national insurance, universal tax credits or employer-paid plans, the better managed competition looks. All at once, two managed competition plans have become part of the debate. Jackson Hole-compatible deserves to be the standard by which to judge all the rest.
Tuberculosis was once a major killer in the U.S., so feared that its victims were isolated in sanitariums. Antibiotics brought the scourge under control. New cases fell from 84,000 in 1953 to 22,000 in the mid-80's.
Hard-pressed governments then let their guard down. Funds for controlling TB were slashed, research was cut, beds and clinics were closed, companies stopped developing new drugs and the Federal Government stopped monitoring the appearance of new strains.
Soon the toll began rising, reaching almost 26,000 cases nationwide in 1990, scattered from the inner city to rural areas. In New York City, tuberculosis cases rose from 1,300 in 1978 to an estimated 3,700 last year.
Most frightening of all, new strains of tuberculosis resistant to multiple drugs have emerged in at least 17 states. A one-month survey in New York City found 34 percent of all TB patients resistant to at least one drug, 19 percent resistant to the two main drugs and some resistant to virtually all drugs. For them, there is little medicine can do.
The main reason that drug-resistant strains develop is that patients fail to complete full treatment. Organisms that survived the initial doses then proliferate in the body and in turn infect others. Such failures are understandable. TB patients must take three or four drugs daily or twice a week for nine months or more, long after they have started feeling well and have little incentive to continue. It's hard enough for an educated, middle-class person; it's virtually impossible for the poor, the homeless, the mentally ill and the drug addicts who are most of the infected population.
The tuberculosis problem has been exacerbated by the AIDS virus, which weakens the immune system. Roughly 25 to 50 percent of all tuberculosis victims in New York City are infected with the AIDS virus, and drug-resistant strains are heavily concentrated in the AIDS population. But many experts say tuberculosis and drug resistance would have increased even without the AIDS epidemic, though less sharply.
The greatest need now is for a large cadre of outreach workers to check every day that TB patients have taken their prescribed medicines. That process is demonstrably effective and far cheaper than sanitariums. Beds in hospitals or long-term care facilities will be needed for the very sick or recalcitrant.
The Bush Administration, finally alert, has requested that funds for TB control be more than doubled in 1993, from $31 million to $66 million. But experts in the Administration and outside say the figure should be at least $125 million.
New York City has its own ambitious plan to increase TB spending by $19 million in 1993 and provide $84 million in capital funds to build a prison TB unit, expand homeless TB shelters, and improve clinics. Workers will be hired to supervise medication for perhaps 1,500 patients. But additional workers could reach thousands more.
Tuberculosis re-emerged through neglect. The task now is to catch up with the epidemic before drug-resistant strains gain an unassailable foothold.
Its broad base, for example, represents grains, indicating that foods like bread, cereal, rice and pasta should constitute the biggest part of a healthy diet. Just above the grains come fruits and vegetables, then a shorter band of meat and dairy products and finally, at the apex, fats, oils and sweets, with the advice, "Use sparingly."
Mr. Madigan's original decision to suspend the pyramid last year followed strenuous lobbying by the meat and dairy industries. They feared that their placement on the pyramid just under fats and oils implied Federal advice to buy less of their products. Mr. Madigan insisted that he hadn't folded to pressure and simply wanted to test the chart's usefulness as a teaching aid.
Those tests confirmed what experts already knew, that the pyramid effectively conveys the nutrition message Americans most need to hear: Eat less fat. Even so, Mr. Madigan's office is said to have preferred the bowl-type design favored by the meat and dairy lobbies. It does not quantify foods as clearly as the pyramid.
But Mr. Madigan could hardly ignore the research findings. Spending all those extra dollars just to confirm earlier research is lamentable. But even so, the Food Guide Pyramid is more than a chart. It embodies a big step forward for nutrition and health. It can help, even at the expense of hundreds of thousands of added dollars, save thousands of American lives.
It's also frustrating. People without life-threatening conditions may wait hours before seeing a doctor. Cost and frustration discourage some people from seeking medical help until illnesses grow serious. But that only makes them more expensive to treat.
This gross misuse of emergency rooms evolved as the Federal Government withdrew funding from inner-city clinics that once provided the basic health care that more affluent people seek from a family doctor. The Communi-Care plan would begin to reconstitute the system, building up the neighborhood clinics that remain.
The city plans to spend $21 million over two years enhancing 20 clinics now operated by either the Health and Hospitals Corporation or the Department of Health. Renovations and the addition of 70 doctors and other staff would expand capacity from 167,300 to 233,450 patients per year.
More important, the clinics would no longer treat only certain categories of patients, nor bill for each service. Instead, enrolled patients would pay set monthly fees, no matter how much they used the clinics. That gives clinics a financial incentive to emphasize preventive medicine. In time, this "managed" approach could greatly reduce health costs borne by taxpayers.
The plan remains financially uncertain. If City Hall fails to win state approval for certain tax increases, Communi-Care's $27 million annual operating expense might be imperiled. And the city might have to offer premium pay to lure doctors for inner-city practice at a fixed salary. Further, the expansion, while substantial, may still fall far short of the need.
But the Dinkins administration merits praise for recognizing the need and capitalizing on a small budget surplus. Combining expanded clinic services with managed care could produce a handsome return in good management and good health.
Even more carnations would have been on display had not so many third world countries adopted family planning. Only 30 years ago, less than 10 percent of couples in developing countries used birth control. Today more than half do.
Still, the rate at which humans multiply remains awesome, as do the consequences. Only 1 percent of American women between 15 and 49 dies from maternity causes; the rate for poor countries ranges from 20 to 46 percent.
The world's growth rate is now slowing faster than seemed possible in the 60's. Past U.S. aid for population control deserves some of the credit. But the United States renounced its leadership of international family planning in the Reagan years by ending aid to any agency that so much as mentioned abortion. Resumption of that leadership could make an extraordinary impact on the future -- and on the number of women for whom pregnancy is not a fact of life but of death.
Even more carnations would have been on display had not so many third world countries adopted family planning. Only 30 years ago, less than 10 percent of couples in developing countries used birth control. Today more than half do.
Still, the rate at which humans multiply remains awesome, as do the consequences. Only 1 percent of American women between 15 and 49 dies from maternity causes; the rate for poor countries ranges from 20 to 46 percent.
The world's growth rate is now slowing faster than seemed possible in the 60's. Past U.S. aid for population control deserves some of the credit. But the United States renounced its leadership of international family planning in the Reagan years by ending aid to any agency that so much as mentioned abortion. Resumption of that leadership could make an extraordinary impact on the future -- and on the number of women for whom pregnancy is not a fact of life but of death.
Even some dedicated black health workers engaged in the fight against AIDS decline to disavow these fears. Testifying before the National Commission on AIDS, one said that "until proven otherwise" she considered AIDS a man-made disease.
Worse yet, the treatments and preventives against AIDS have become suspect. Some blacks believe that AZT, the harsh drug used to combat the disease, is a plot to poison them . . . that campaigns urging use of condoms, the best way to prevent sexual transmission, are a scheme to reduce the number of black babies . . . that distributing clean needles to slow transmission among addicts is a plot to encourage drug abuse.
At its most destructive, the paranoia causes many blacks to avoid medical treatment. Unless black and Hispanic leaders play a more vigorous role in countering the fears and mistrust, it will become ever harder to slow the epidemic.
The task is urgent because the disease is now spreading most rapidly among minorities. Last year, for the first time, the number of AIDS cases reported for minorities exceeded the number for whites. Most worrisome for the future, blacks account for a majority of AIDS cases in women and children. "AIDS in future generations may be primarily a disease of black people," the New York Department of Health warned last month.
Yet the response to this growing crisis has been sluggish. Financially pressed minority organizations and local governments have little energy for fighting AIDS, especially given the stigma attached to its main victims, homosexuals and drug addicts. But whether financing for minority AIDS programs has lagged behind white programs, as some black leaders charge, is not clear. Federal and state funds to minority AIDS organizations have gone up and the Government's central programs, like counseling and testing services, have huge minority caseloads.
No programs, even if well financed, will succeed without a change in attitudes. Thus it is welcome news that the New York State Health Department, with the help of black politicians and community leaders, has started a media campaign to encourage blacks to mobilize against AIDS.
The campaign rightly stresses that AZT and condoms are not plots against blacks. But it refuses to counteract the paranoia about AIDS as genocide, saying only that no matter how AIDS got started, there are ways to stop it. Campaign officials reasoned that few blacks would believe government denials anyway. But surely black leaders and public figures with high credibility, such as Magic Johnson, the basketball star, could do much to discredit the pernicious and dispiriting rumors.
Meanwhile, Federal, state and local health officials need a far better assessment of the flow of AIDS money into minority communities and stronger programs to fight the disease there. Costly drug treatment ought to be provided to all who seek it, an investment that would yield dividends far beyond slowing the spread of AIDS. And more vigorous outreach programs might persuade more individuals to avoid risky behavior.
As white Americans, shaken by the riots in Los Angeles, search for ways to help afflicted and distrustful minorities, there's no wiser way to start than AIDS. A failure to treat and prevent AIDS among minorities: That would be the true genocide.
All that Dr. James Humes and Dr. Thornton Boswell conclude is that the President's wounds did not and do not lie. A bruise at the rear of the neck signifies a bullet's entry. The "beveling" or angle of the bone fracture at the back of the skull makes clear the direction of the bullet that blew away the side of the President's head. It's like deducing the direction of a BB shot from its path through a pane of glass, small at the entry point and coning out at the other side.
Conspiracy buffs remain free to contend all they please that other would-be assassins fired at the President (and missed) in Dallas on that terrible day in November 1963. Or that Lee Harvey Oswald was only the point man in a conspiracy involving gangsters, or Cubans or even all the high officials named by the character "X" in the Oliver Stone movie "J.F.K."
Jim Garrison, the New Orleans prosecutor whose relentless pursuit of a conspiracy is glorified in the film, knew of this evidence and its clarity. So did the jury that swiftly acquitted Clay Shaw, the businessman whom Garrison falsely accused of conspiracy. The Stone film omitted this evidence from its portrayal of the trial.
For these and other reasons, it makes considerable sense for the Federal Government to declassify and publish reams of still-secret information. Students of the assassination who are neither hysterical nor paranoid believe there's still much to learn about the assassin and about the actions of intelligence agencies.
Congress is proceeding wisely to create a commission for that purpose. To be credible, that commission must have the power to override the resistance of intelligence agencies. Yet the Bush Administration has opposed, and even threatened to veto a bill moving in both houses. Why? Because the White House insists that Congress respect the President's ultimate authority over secrets.
Would that President Bush understood as clearly as the medical journal how much more important it is to satisfy the public's rightful quest for the rest of the John Kennedy assassination story. Frustrating it will only feed the flames of suspicion.
Such reasoning is ludicrous. Given America's high abortion rate, there's no shortage of fetal tissue. Any financial incentive for ending a pregnancy could be eliminated by banning the
sale
of fetal issue, and any psychological incentive could be removed by separating the decision to abort from the decision to donate fetal tissue.
The Senate, responding to the medical opportunities, passed legislation to lift the ban by a huge margin last spring. The House approved similar legislation but fell just short of the vote necessary to override a Presidential veto. The backers, from a broad ideological spectrum, include Senators Dole of Kansas, Hatfield of Oregon, Danforth of Missouri, Domenici of New Mexico and Thurmond of South Carolina -- all of them Republicans, and all abortion opponents. But all discount the argument that expanding fetal tissue research would encourage elective abortion; and all back Senator Dole's contention that "to support this research is the true pro-life position."
The House will vote on the final version of the legislation soon, and it is certain to pass again in the Senate. Should President Bush veto it, he will, in the name of being pro-life, turn his back on the many Americans for whom fetal research represents a new chance at life.
The point is not to ridicule the Canadians. They are justifiably proud of a system that guarantees everyone quality medical care at no direct cost. It's a humane system, superior in some ways to that in the U.S. But as appears increasingly clear, the system's reputation exceeds its performance. The United States will not solve its health care crisis by looking north.
At first glance, Canadians would seem to have it all: universal coverage and quality care at a cost of $700 less per person than in the U.S. Canadians pick their doctors and hospitals; the Government sets fees and pays the bills.
By one measure, the system appears to be working spectacularly. In the early 1970's, Canada and the U.S. each devoted about 6 percent of total output to medical care. Since then, as Canada's share rose to about 10 percent, the U.S. share zoomed to 13 percent.
But data analyzed by Health Policy International, a nonprofit research group in Princeton, N.J., show that this seeming success occurred because Canada's economy grew rapidly, not because medical costs rose slowly. Indeed, after adjusting for inflation, health costs in the 1980's rose faster in Canada than in the U.S.
There are other reasons to be wary of comparison with Canada. Proportionately, fewer Canadians are poor or old, the costliest patients. Homicide rates are a third those in the U.S. And the system saves money in ways U.S. patients might find intolerable -- by restricting access to advanced technology and quick treatment.
No Canadians wait for emergency surgery, but they routinely wait weeks for urgent surgery, like heart bypass operations, and up to a year for non-urgent procedures like hip replacements. Even so, Canadian costs by far exceed those of any industrialized nation except the U.S.
Many U.S. proposals for controlling hospital costs call for adopting Canada's system of global budgets -- setting annual payments independent of actual admissions and outlays. But recent studies should temper enthusiasm. They show hospital stays 70 percent longer than in the U.S. -- presumably because the system encourages hospitals not to release recovering patients rather than admitting expensive-to-treat new patients.
Beyond all such details hovers the question of innovation. Like most of the world, Canada freeloads off U.S. research and innovation. If the U.S. adopted the Canadian model, to whom would the world look for progress?
The United States will have to devise its own health care cost reform, if only for reasons of politics. The Canadian system works well in Canada's disciplined parliamentary democracy. Compare that with Washington, where 535 members of Congress compete for the political spotlight. The Canadian health care system is good, but not good enough to meet America's needs.
That Mr. Orth all but bankrupted himself on the surgery is not unusual. Many people will spend their last buck on the unproven, and why shouldn't they? As Dr. Norman Fost, an ethicist at the University of Wisconsin, puts it, "If someone near the end of their life wants to go out and spend their life's savings on what seems to me to be a long shot, why shouldn't they be allowed?"
They should be, at least for procedures that are not illegal. After all, fetal cell infusion is not a quack cure from which Mr. Orth needs to be protected; it is the most promising therapy for Parkinson's disease. But the Federal Government, responding to abortion opponents, has refused to support the research.
True, President Bush ordered establishment of a Government fetal tissue bank last week. But that won't pay for clinical experiments like the one Mr. Orth paid for himself. Indeed, Mr. Bush's order was mostly a deep bow to anti-abortionists -- since the tissue from miscarriages and ectopic pregnancies, which is all the tissue bank will accept, is rarely suitable for research.
Robert Orth is lucky in his friends: they helped pay for his surgery. But he and countless others suffering from Parkinson's disease are sadly unlucky in their President. Their plight provides a very human reason for Congress to reinstate Federal support of fetal tissue research even over the likely veto of President Bush.
After their marriage in 1979 Mrs. Davis, now Mary Sue Davis Stowe, suffered several ectopic pregnancies, a rupture of one Fallopian tube and the tying-off of the second. Following the in vitro procedure she was implanted with two of the resulting nine fertilized eggs, but the attempt failed. So, soon after, did the marriage.
Even so, the former Mrs. Davis wanted to try again, by implanting some of the remaining embryos. Mr. Davis sued to block her, saying he had a right to control his own reproduction. The lower-court judge who heard the case had a difficult decision. Were the fertilized eggs "pre-born children," in which case the court had to look to their interests? Or were they property, in which case ownership could be settled as in a property dispute?
Saying that keeping the eggs frozen for over two years (the presumed limit of their viability) was "tantamount to the destruction of human beings," the judge awarded them to Mrs. Davis. An appellate court, however, upheld Mr. Davis and called the fertilized eggs simple property of the marriage to be disposed of equitably like other property in a divorce.
The Tennessee Supreme Court carved its own response wisely and carefully. The eggs, the court said, were neither people nor property but an interim category, "pre-embryos." Consideration of them, it said, could not be separated from consideration of the rights and responsibilities of the donors of the eggs and sperm.
Since Mary Sue Davis Stowe had other ways of becoming a mother, including adoption, her desire for parenthood should not automatically outweigh her husband's desire to avoid it.
Mrs. Stowe had also weakened her case by indicating that she no longer planned to have the embryos implanted in her own uterus but intended to donate them anonymously to a childless couple, leaving her former husband in ignorance of the fate of his own offspring.
When the first "test-tube baby" was born 14 years ago, medical technology was running well ahead of the law. The Tennessee decision, with its intelligent balancing of reproductive rights, is welcome proof that the law is finally catching up.
With Washington's approval, Connecticut last year offered seniors an insurance plan that allows them to go on Medicaid and still retain sizable assets. A person could, say, buy a $100,000 policy. If at some point he or she needed a nursing home, the policy would pay for bills up to $100,000. Once that ran out, Medicaid would automatically kick in.
As a side benefit, the policyholder, who would already have paid stiff premiums for the privilege, would get to keep assets equal to the value of the policy -- $100,000 in this case. Both patients and the state will benefit: the state because the insurance picks up the first $100,000 of nursing home costs, the patients because they won't need to spend themselves into poverty -- or surreptitiously transfer their assets to others -- to qualify for Medicaid.
New York insurance companies have been authorized to start selling a simpler, one-size-fits-all policy. Under the plan, New Yorkers would be eligible to buy private insurance that would provide three years of nursing home care or six years of home care. If further care was needed, the Federal Government would automatically transfer the patients' bills to Medicaid without touching a cent of their remaining assets.
In New York, the average nursing home costs $62,000 a year. Even home care eats money. Last year, long-term care for New York State residents cost the state $6 billion -- one-fourth the national total of $25 billion.
The insurance proposal isn't perfect. Some senior citizen groups say it diverts attention from the need for a national long-term care policy. Statisticians remain unclear about state and city costs once the policies run out. Nor is the idea cheap; premiums could cost individuals $3,000 a year.
But any plan, even one that only nibbles at Medicaid's runaway costs, deserves a fair trial.
One way is to deride the messenger. A commission of journalists condemned "prurient reporting" and called the accounts "odious." The Archbishop of Canterbury deplored the intrusion into the royal couple's privacy as beyond the boundaries acceptable to a decent society.
But because the sources were friends of the Princess, the possibility exists that she wanted her travails made public, perhaps to change her husband's behavior or to prepare the grounds for divorce. ("Throw the Bum Out" was an American newspaper's helpful contribution.)
Another way to react is judgmental: to place the blame for her mental state on her husband, whose alleged insensitivity and infidelity presumably drove the young, pregnant bride to a state of distraction. "Diana driven to five suicide bids by 'uncaring' Charles," goes the Sunday Times headline; "Marriage collapse led to illness."
But that's amateur psychiatry at its worst. Although bulimia, a mental illness first formally described in 1979, can be triggered or aggravated by stress, it is simplistic and inaccurate to blame its development on any professor, husband, parent or lover. (Over 90 percent of its victims are white females in the middle or upper classes; college-age women are most at risk.)
A third reaction -- surely in the minds of competing newsmen -- is to go after "his side of the story." Friends of Prince Charles are surely eager to point out how impossible or spoiled Princess Di has been, how noble and long-suffering he is.
That's not going to fly; she's the more sympathetic character in this real-life royal drama, and has been dutifully producing royal heirs. Any counter-blaming from background would backfire.
Can Buckingham Palace, already rocked by divorces, do anything to affect the public reaction other than freeze into silence and hope it will all blow over?
Presuming the report about Diana's bulimia and self-destructive acts to be true, one Anglophile has a constructive suggestion. First, some basics about the illness:
Psychiatrists say that bulimia (like the related eating disorder anorexia) is often rooted in a lack of self-esteem in childhood; patients are often conscientious young people setting impossibly high standards for themselves. This is complicated by a culture that equates skinniness with desirability: it was the Duchess of Windsor who supposedly said, "You can't be too rich or too thin."
When a bulimic feels the ache of emptiness and loses control over eating, she tries to regain the approval she thinks slenderness brings by purges or sticking fingers down the throat. The illness is often associated with feelings of depression and of rage turned inward, leading to the self-destructive "cries for help" attributed to Princess Diana.
Because bulimia is so prevalent in Britain and the United States, and because it can be fatal, it needs to be destigmatized and better understood. Some famous person -- one unafraid to say she has experienced it -- is needed to identify with other victims, and offer them hope for recovery while raising funds for research.
That's what modern princesses are for, not to be clotheshorses or garden-partygoers. Diana Spencer has not suffered anything like the madness of King George III, but she has already shown gutsy solidarity to friends with AIDS. She should now rise above embarrassment and use her royal position and personal experience to help victims of bulimia everywhere.
Don't be fooled by the big clunky convertibles and the sleeveless sheath dresses, by the black-and-white televisions and the pastel formica in the kitchens.
The props and sets are 1962. But the substance is today, and tomorrow too.
The television movie "A Private Matter" is the story of Sherri Finkbine. She would probably be surprised to hear that, in an informal survey of 10 educated women in their 30's, all but two said "Who?" when they heard her name.
Sherri Finkbine was infamous once. She was pregnant. She took tranquilizers. She discovered that they were Thalidomide, a teratogen that was being linked to the births of thousands of European babies without limbs. Her doctor recommended a termination. She already had four small children. She couldn't imagine caring for them and a fifth with serious impairments. The doctor scheduled a therapeutic abortion.
"You know what I hate about it most? The way it has to be a secret.  Like I'm doing something dirty." -- Sherri Finkbine  in "A Private Matter"
"There are ways as long as nobody talks about it." -- The Doctor
Then Sherri Finkbine made a big mistake. She told a reporter. She wanted to warn other women about thalidomide. They were her friends, the small clique of newspeople in Phoenix, Ariz. In what would seem later to be God's gift to the media, she was a TV personality herself: Miss Sherri, the local hostess of "Romper Room."
Do Bee quiet about your abortion.
She lost that job. The abortion was canceled. It was finally performed in Sweden. The movie ends as she and her husband board the plane. It airs Saturday night on HBO, the networks loving cancer and true crime but steering clear of abortion.
Why dramatize this now, 30 years later, when many women don't even recognize Sherri Finkbine's name?  Because they'll recognize her life.
Because we still keep quiet. Because our silence perpetuates the fiction that abortions are performed only on the promiscuous, the thoughtless and the uninformed. One survey showed that almost 50 percent of American women having abortions already had children. Loving mothers have abortions every day. After her abortion, Sherri Finkbine went on to have two more children.
"I'll have the baby. Spend the rest of my life taking care of him like everybody wants. And everybody'll say, 'Isn't she wonderful?' " -- Sherri Finkbine  in "A Private Matter"
"Why don't you take your other four kids and strangle them too?" -- Anonymous Letter Writer  The law that enabled Sherri Finkbine's doctor to schedule her surgery, then enabled the hospital to cancel it, is back in vogue in states seeking to restrict abortion. It permits abortion if the life of the mother is in danger. If it is interpreted narrowly, almost no one will be able to have an abortion; if it is not, it will be a farce, a way to make us dependent on the kindness of strangers.
In one of the movie's most compelling scenes, a psychiatrist examines Mrs. Finkbine to develop evidence that her life is in danger. Don't sleep?  he asks. Cry a lot? But she won't cop to being suicidal. "Take my own life?" she says, incredulous. "I have four small children."
It wasn't that she thought she'd kill herself; she thought having that baby would kill her family. "Family values," she says of her motivation today, divorced and remarried and still psychologically sore in spots.
Thirty years later, and she is a pile of clippings on my desk, a memory in the minds of some, a "Who?" in the collective unconscious of others. So many people wanted to tell her what was best for her life, then walk away and leave her to live it. So many want to do that today: insist that they know best what makes us good mothers, women, people, and then leave us to live with the consequences of their convictions. Sherri Finkbine said no.  She doesn't regret that, only that three decades later we still have to say no over and over and over and over again.

The Democratic leadership has split over how to deal with the crisis in health care. Medical costs are rising three times faster than inflation, and almost 40 million Americans are uninsured.
Some members of Congress favor "play-or-pay," an approach that would preserve private insurers. Employers would enroll workers in private plans or else pay a tax to enroll them in a public backup plan. Other members favor single-payer plans, like Canada's. These would eliminate private insurers and enroll everyone in a single Government plan.
Play-or-pay appeals to members who fear turning health care over to government; single-payer appeals to those who want a universal system into which everyone pays for the same basic coverage. Democrats are coming to realize that, with managed competition, they can have it all.
John Garamendi, California's insurance commissioner, has proposed a plan, now working its way through the State Legislature, that provides the best of both worlds. Employers and employees would pay a payroll tax to a regional authority, or sponsor. The sponsor would contract with private insurers to offer basic coverage, defined by the government, to any applicant at no additional cost. The sponsor would also contract with private insurers to offer members more generous plans. But buyers would have to pay for the entire additional cost, a useful brake on skyrocketing premiums.
Because the Garamendi plan builds in competition among private insurers, it appeals to some advocates of play-or-pay. And because the plan taxes everyone for identical basic coverage, it appeals to some single-payer advocates. The tax, in effect, imposes a global budget on basic health care without imposing the heavy hand of price controls.
Unable to win consensus for comprehensive reform, Democrats like Chairman Dan Rostenkowski of the tax-writing committee back piecemeal measures. They at least want to curtail repugnant practices like discriminating against applicants with certain medical conditions.
Such reform would surely be welcome but is not enforceable if imposed piecemeal. Telling insurers to enroll AIDS victims at fixed rates in effect tells the companies to lose money. That compels insurers to find loopholes. The Garamendi plan, however, would allow sponsors to reimburse insurers who enroll disproportionate numbers of people who have costly chronic illnesses.
The longer the House looks at managed competition, the better it looks. The leadership has already decided to put a managed competition bill, sponsored by the Democrats Jim Cooper of Tennessee and Michael Andrews of Texas, up for vote next month along with play-or-pay and single-payer. That's welcome news.
It's still unlikely that Congress can complete reform legislation this year, even though the crisis in health care costs obviously roils the public. But now, at least, the House seems to be finding a path through the wilderness.
Another provision would allow states to relax requirements that limit distribution of methadone to heroin addicts. The AIDS virus spreads rapidly from dirty needles used by addicts. Methadone, a drug that blocks heroin craving, reduces that transmission because it is taken orally.
Federal regulations now prohibit dispensing methadone without elaborate social services for addicts. No one disputes the benefit of such services, but their cost limits enrollment. Many addicts continue abusing drugs, spreading AIDS and committing crimes while they wait to enroll. The new measure would require fewer services for those who wait.
Approval of this measure by the House would demonstrate that Congress can act to cut addiction and save lives.
As the board insisted, the curriculum stresses abstinence. But it allows teachers to educate, not merely lecture -- to demystify the virus by discussing its origins and by dispelling myths about how the disease is transmitted. Condoms may be discussed, although demonstrations of their use are not recommended until junior high school.
An AIDS curriculum for kindergarten to sixth grade has been in the works since 1988, with contributions from health, education and community organizations. A draft was submitted to the board for approval in March.
But nothing concerning AIDS education in city schools has come easily. One month ago, a 4-to-3 majority of the board passed a resolution requiring that all materials about AIDS place primary emphasis on abstinence. That resolution, passed without required advance notice and without adequate public debate, was further proof of the board's compulsion to micromanage day-to-day operations instead of setting broad policy.
AIDS is an important subject. But so are other issues like approving contracts for community organizations to provide dropout prevention services and approving new high schools in two overcrowded community districts. The board has won its battle for stronger language on abstinence. It's time to move on.
True, the President ordered the establishment of a Government fetal tissue bank last month. But don't let the fanfare fool you. This is a sham program that will accept only tissue from miscarriages and ectopic pregnancies -- tissue that is rarely suitable for research because it is usually defective or diseased.
The President's rationale, like that expressed by President Reagan before him, makes no sense in the abstract and even less in real life. Pregnant women, Presidents Reagan and Bush have argued, might choose to abort in the interests of medical research or ailing relatives. Ergo, Federal support of fetal tissue research is tantamount to encouraging abortion.
It's ludicrous reasoning for several reasons. Given the high abortion rate, there's no shortage of fetal tissue and hence no incentive for creating more. Any fear that some women might nevertheless be induced to abort for money can be met by banning the sale of fetal tissue. And any psychological incentive can be removed by separating the decision to abort from that to donate fetal tissue.
But never mind any of these facts. Never mind anything but the lengths to which the President will go to appease an especially vociferous segment of his constituency.
The American Medical Association and the American College of Physicians think the President is wrong. So, along with substantial majorities in Congress, do Senators Dole of Kansas, Hatfield of Oregon, Danforth of Missouri, Domenici of New Mexico and Thurmond of South Carolina -- all of them Republicans, and all of them opponents of abortion.
The people with the harshest reason to know that the President is wrong are all those millions of victims of Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease.  Their right to life is threatened by Mr. Bush's fallacious effort to protect the unborn.
Mr. Marino's position reflects naked partisanship and ignores his constituents. They need protection against bad fiscal practices, as did residents of New York City in the 1970's and of Yonkers in the 1970's and 1980's. New York and Yonkers were in worse shape when the Legislature created control boards to oversee them. But without oversight, Nassau and Suffolk could quickly deteriorate.
Gov. Mario Cuomo is playing a trading game, linking the bailouts to his plan for a state takeover of all Medicaid costs. He suggests he won't support the borrowing unless Mr. Marino drops his opposition to Medicaid reform. Yet even as he bargains, the Governor cannot soften on the Long Island budget mess; if he ultimately agrees to the borrowing, he has an obligation to insist on oversight.
For his part, Mr. Marino has an obligation to act to protect Long Island's fiscal stability.
The idea is to end discrimination against vulnerable groups. Hence the new law declares that New Yorkers who are old, lose their jobs or fall prey to AIDS may not be stripped of insurance. And the law would also protect nonprofit insurers, notably Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, from collapse by requiring commercial insurers to play by the same rules.
Nonprofit insurers are required to cover all applicants at nondiscriminatory rates. Commercial insurers, however, have been free to turn away the sick, to cancel coverage
after
customers become ill and to charge more for risky customers, like the elderly.
This dual system is unraveling. Commercial insurers are drawing away Empire's healthiest customers by offering lower premiums. Left with sicker, more costly enrollees, Empire has been forced to raise premiums. Without the new law, it would have needed another whopping rate increase.
Under the new law, premiums for healthy applicants will rise; premiums for high-risk groups will fall. One danger is that the new rules will drive many commercial firms out of New York. A more likely danger is that the higher rates will lead many young, healthy residents to drop insurance.
Even if neither threat proves real, the law will almost certainly prove unsustainable. By requiring an insurer to sign up an AIDS patient at community rates, the law is telling the company it must lose money. That will drive insurers to find loopholes. They will not necessarily resort to moving their claims offices to 10-story walk-ups, but can readily find ways to discourage paraplegics and other high-risk applicants.
In any case, the law does virtually nothing about either of the monumental failures of the present insurance system -- exploding medical costs and a vast number of uninsured.
An effective law must eliminate incentives to cheat. There are models. A reform proposed in California would allow authorities to reimburse insurers who enroll a disproportionate number of AIDS patients and other high-risk residents. The money would come from insurers who sign up less-risky customers. The California plan would also guarantee coverage to all citizens and, best of all, control costs through competition.
The New York Legislature has the right goal in mind. But merely declaring it falls a long way short of achieving it.
The F.D.A. allows small-dose imports for personal use of unapproved drugs from anti-wrinkle creams to cancer and AIDS-related treatments. But in timid response to anti-abortion members of Congress, and even though the drug appears safe in foreign studies, the agency specifically excluded RU486.
Last week in New York's Federal District Court, Judge Charles Sifton found that the regulators had abused even the broad discretion the law gives them. But his order to return the pills was stayed by the Court of Appeals, and the Supreme Court refused on Friday to reinstate the judge's order.
Ms. Benten, eight weeks pregnant, cannot wait any longer to use the drug and is thus deprived of its benefits, which include home privacy and avoiding hospitals and clinics. She will now undergo a surgical abortion. But she has helped advance the interests of many other women.
Her lawsuit already has exposed the F.D.A.'s disorderly, politically shaped patchwork of import exemptions. Her suit and others to follow may yet shame or force the agency into orderly rulemaking. More cases would also make clear that there is strong demand in this country for the kind of safe, accessible abortion that this pill is providing abroad.
It's certain we women can learn from this, after all these years of waiting politely for a male medical and governmental establishment to be nice to us. When the President pandered yet again to the anti-abortion lobby by vetoing a measure that would pay for research on women's health issues because it also lifted the ban on fetal tissue research, it was clear we'd been polite too long.
And then there's RU-486, a pill that causes early abortion. Comparisons are odious, but imagine if doctors discovered a method of vasectomy that required only a handful of capsules and a drink of water. It'd be approved so fast it would make your head spin.
A pregnant social worker named Leona Benten was stopped at Kennedy Airport in New York when she flew in from Europe carrying a duly prescribed dose of RU-486. The drug is on a special import alert list, although even some Food and Drug Administration officials say that this has nothing to do with safety. It didn't go on the list at the behest of serious scientists, but at the request of conservative members of Congress, thereby making the F.D.A. an arm of the right-to-life lobby.
But RU-486 is not just a drug that induces abortion. There is evidence that it may help fight breast cancer, a disease that leads to the deaths of 44,000 American women a year. Some doctors think the drug could prove useful in treating adult diabetes, hypertension and other cancers. But they -- and you, if you suffer from any of those conditions -- are stymied here in the United States by the unhappy alliance of politics, medicine and corporate caution.
The pharmaceutical company that manufactures RU-486, Roussel Uclaf, has acted as businesses tend to do. It pulled the drug off the market in its native France after protests, putting it back on only after the French Government ordered it to do so. The company has not even sought approval for RU-486 in this country, where posses of men illustrate their respect for life by thrusting fetal remains at candidates and clinic escorts. In several European countries, where there is less fetus-throwing, RU-486 is being used with success and safety.
There is a kind of resonance to all this for anyone who has read Ellen Chesler's marvelous biography of Margaret Sanger. One legal challenge described in the book is entitled -- truly --
United States v. One Package Containing 120, more or less, Rubber Pessaries to Prevent Conception.
The offending devices were sent to Mrs. Sanger by a Japanese doctor, then confiscated by customs. This was not an uncommon problem; after Mrs. Sanger married the inventor of 3-In-One oil, he smuggled diaphragms in the product's containers.  It all seems rather quaint, as Leona Benten's difficulties someday will, which is cold comfort to her today.
Ms. Benten brought the ban on RU-486 to the public's attention. Sadly, the attendant fuss may also have reinforced Roussel Uclaf's dedication to conflict avoidance in the United States, at least for the time being.
But contained in this episode are the seeds of a powerful lobby: women who want abortions to be performed as early and as safely as possible; women who have lost mothers to breast cancer and are at risk themselves; women who believe that health care should be separate from a political agenda.
Oh, and women who vote. Those familiar with the politics of RU-486 believe that it could be licensed in short order if the political atmosphere changed. Not in time for Leona Benten, but not a moment too soon for millions of other women who must be less patient and more militant about health care.
Unfortunately, the Senate left Albany on July 3 without voting on whether to grant the funds that would allow the enrollment of 20,000 more. Now, however, Ralph Marino, the Senate majority leader, has another chance to provide better health for New York youngsters. All he has to do is put the bill on the docket; and all the Senate has to do is vote as positively -- and humanely -- as the Assembly already has.
Just how shoddy a sham was shown this week, in memorandums from the National Institutes of Health. The Administration, N.I.H. officials said, had hugely exaggerated the amount of fetal tissue the bank could obtain. Furthermore, the cost would be astronomical. To make the bank work nationally, for example, each of the country's 6,600 hospitals would have to spend at least $500,000 in salaries for the emergency collection teams alone.
There's a way around this ridiculousness, however: a revised N.I.H. bill scheduled to go to a Senate committee for markup today. The bill would leave the Bush ban in place until May 19, 1993. At that point, those using fetal tissue for transplantation research would apply to the Government bank. If no suitable tissue was available within 14 days of the request, the research could then be carried out with tissue from other sources, including induced abortions.
Mr. Bush chose to ignore millions of ill Americans and their families, the majority of physicians and a substantial majority in Congress when he vetoed a bill to lift the Administration ban last month. Now Congress has a second chance to give the dying a possible second chance at life. This time, may the vote be big enough to override Mr. Bush's stubborn "No!"
The Supreme Court's decision on July 17 to support the Government's seizure of the drug raised the stakes in the battle over women's bodies. RU-486 holds the promise of allowing us to distinguish the simple termination of an early pregnancy from later, more complicated abortion procedures, which understandably trouble so many people.
Developed and marketed by the French pharmaceutical company Roussel Uclaf, for which it is named, the synthetic drug works by blocking the naturally produced hormone progesterone. It prevents the implantation of the fertilized egg in the uterus, and in this sense, then, no "life" is ever created.
With this in mind, Etienne-Emile Baulieu, the inventor of RU-486, calls the pill a "contragestive," rather than an abortifacient, linking it to the routine and widely accepted prevention of pregnancy through hormonal contraception, which in many ways it resembles.
If naming conveys ownership, as Margaret Sanger insisted when she invented the term "birth control" and later the even more user-friendly "family planning," then we may be able to add an important new dimension to the abortion debate.
Administered orally along with a low dose of prostaglandin, a chemical agent that stimulates uterine contractions, RU-486 has so far been found to be safe and effective. The two drugs, however, must be given sequentially on consecutive days, and because there may be side effects, including prolonged and possibly painful contractions and bleeding, the procedure must be medically supervised. It does not provide the autonomous, private, pill-popping experience some of its most euphoric partisans promise, and its most vocal opponents fear.
The unregulated distribution of the two potent chemicals that make up the RU-486 regimen -- or their careless use in later pregnancies -- may be dangerous, a fact that feminists concerned about women's reproductive health have gone to great lengths to point out. In fact, the principal argument of those who favor letting the drug into the country is to allow for more reliable Government testing.
With additional investigation, RU-486 also holds promise as a "morning after" pill. It may provide a breakthrough as well against breast cancer and other tumor-related diseases in which progesterone plays a role.
And though RU-486 must be taken under the supervision of a doctor or a nurse, it does not require clinics, expensive machinery or intrusive equipment. These are important considerations in a country where 1.5 million abortions are performed yearly, many at great cost and sacrifice.
Further testing of RU-486, along with the opportunity to invent newly liberating language, may help us find the common ground that so many Americans seem to be seeking on the abortion issue this year.
Thus the only possible explanation for the Government's dogged objections to lifting the import ban is the politics of the abortion issue.
What a pity that George Bush, who as a Congressman helped pass the family planning acts of 1967, which finally guaranteed Federal financing for contraceptive programs, should stand in our way now. What a pity that the man who as our chief delegate to the United Nations in the 1970's did so much to advance responsible international population control initiatives, including birth control and abortion, should hamper them now.
What a pity that any man still thinks he can play politics with women's bodies.
Ellen Chesler is author of "Woman of Valor: Margaret Sanger and the Birth Control Movement in America."
President Bush -- despite his hosannas to the plan in the letter below -- hasn't given voters that message. Neither has Bill Clinton, who so far has offered little more than vague pieties. Until they do, talk of reform will remain empty rhetoric.
The fight over health care reform requires two key decisions. Will the plan provide universal, therefore expensive, coverage? And will health costs be controlled by government fiat or by tightly structured markets, the essence of managed competition?
Until recently, many Democratic leaders leaned toward price controls. What was needed, they said, was a preset cap on total health expenditures that would be enforced by setting prices for every doctor, every hospital.
What many have come to understand is that managed competition offers a better answer. Under this system, consumers would be combined into large groups and represented by sophisticated sponsors. The sponsors would negotiate with doctors and hospitals, forcing them to provide high-quality treatment at reasonable cost.
Sponsors would pay providers a fixed fee for each patient, independent of how much care the patient turned out to need, thus encouraging doctors to keep patients healthy and provide the most efficient care when they are sick. This is the method health maintenance organizations already use to control costs.
But Congress can't encourage the use of managed competition unless it tightens the tax code. Consumers won't choose sponsored plans as long as they are allowed, as under current law, to deduct the full cost of wasteful plans. Congress must limit tax deductions to the cost of well-managed sponsored plans; it must disallow higher deductions for wasteful plans.
Mr. Bush understood all this when he announced the outlines of his plan in February. His plan was smart, in places ingenious, and consistent with managed competition. But when it came to the two key decisions, Mr. Bush punted. He failed to propose universal coverage. And he didn't limit tax deductions. Mr. Clinton has also evaded tough choices. He's for universal coverage, but doesn't say how to pay for it or how to contain health care costs.
An optimist can be glad that consensus is at hand. But realists worry that there's no one with the guts to make reform happen.
Yet he provided scant evidence to back up his claim. The few objections he raised could have been resolved with good-faith negotiating. His actions invite suspicion that election-year politicking, not fine-tuned medical ethics or legal judgments, dictated his unfortunate decision.
The Oregon plan ranked 709 medical procedures according to their effectiveness. The rankings also reflected, to a minor degree, surveys to determine community values about quality of life under various medical conditions. Medicaid would then cover as many procedures as the state budget would allow -- which turned out to be the first 587 on the list.
Among the excluded procedures were treatment of common colds, liver transplants for alcoholics, aggressive therapy for AIDS patients judged to be in the last six months of life and life support for extremely premature, low-birthweight babies.
Mr. Sullivan said the surveys of community values reflected bias against the disabled. But he failed to show any pattern of bias in the final rankings. He cited only two examples of bias, both unconvincing. Oregon proposed covering liver transplants for non-alcohol cirrhosis, but not for alcohol-related cirrhosis; to Mr. Sullivan, this reflected bias against alcoholics. But the state was already reviewing this matter, having determined that only current alcoholics should be denied treatment because, for them, transplants would be futile. That's a medical judgment, not discrimination.
Similarly, life support for extremely premature babies and therapy to fight AIDS in its last stages were based on medical prognosis, not disability. Procedures were ranked according to what works -- what improves the health of patients, disabled or not. In the isolated cases where the ranking erred, Oregon has shown enthusiasm to make corrections.
Mr. Sullivan's rejection raises the nightmarish possibility that Oregon won't be allowed to decide treatment on the basis of diagnostic category. After all, any gravely ill person could be deemed disabled.  But that would be a bizarre interpretation of the law and force every state to throw millions into inessential or ineffective treatment at the price of excluding desperately ill families from any coverage.
Oregon's decision to cut back services for some of its poor families is, in a way, cruel. That's why the nation screams out for comprehensive medical reform that guarantees every American affordable coverage. But until that day arrives, states like Oregon have to make choices.
Oregon can continue to provide generous coverage for the few. Or it can provide adequate coverage for all. The Administration has forced it to choose the former, and bears heavy responsibility for those who will suffer.
Together they constitute a mosaic that increasingly resembles something called the Great American Public. So far 152,153 members of that public have died since the epidemic began, and at least a million more, among them Magic Johnson, have tested H.I.V. positive.
Alison Gertz's way to rage against the dying of the light -- and the way many of her companions in AIDS chose to rage -- was to keep on shedding light until the day she died. She talked so that others might learn from her innocence and experience.
As of now, talk remains the best defense we have against the AIDS virus. If the disease isn't as yet curable, it is preventable -- provided that the talk is loud enough.
Alison Gertz had a short life. So had most of the 152,153 others who shared her illness. Many memorials call for a moment of silence. An apt memorial for them is talk -- tough, clear, honest, informative talk.
Our plan is an honest answer to the nation's health care problem. It recognizes that no state can afford to provide every possible medical service and that choices must be made. Where other states are able to make medical coverage available to only a fraction of those in poverty, the Oregon plan would make the most effective care available to everyone.
The plan would have expanded Medicaid to cover all Oregonians below the poverty level. To do this, Oregon would have eliminated coverage of certain services medical practice shows to be less effective than others.
No element of the plan has received more scrutiny than this ranking of treatments. A list of all medical treatments was drawn up by the Oregon Health Services Commission, an 11-member group of doctors, nurses, social workers, consumers and industry professionals. The list emphasized preventive and primary care and maternal and child services.
In 1991, Republicans and Democrats in the state Legislature agreed to finance a package that included 587 medical procedures and treatments out of Medicaid's list of 709. For Oregonians living in poverty, it included virtually all of what Medicaid offers plus services not currently required by Medicaid: dental services, mammograms and pap smears, hospice care, prescription drugs and most transplants. In addition, the plan formed the basis for a package to cover Oregon workers who don't have health insurance. The plan would not have covered 122 treatments, including liver transplants to treat cirrhosis, ineffective care for both extreme low-birthweight babies and people in the final stages of AIDS.
The Department of Health and Human Services has had our waiver application for almost a year. We worked with Federal officials at every step to resolve all their concerns. But the only time we got direct word that they believed our plan conflicted with the Americans With Disabilities Act was in the letter of denial. Where were those concerns for the last year? Why wasn't Oregon given a chance to respond?
My husband is a paraplegic and one of my sons is autistic. I have spent my life working as an advocate for people with disabilities. As Governor, I would not have supported a plan that compromised their rights and needs. Oregon's plan chooses effective treatments over ineffective ones. The Administration claims that such choices discriminate against people with disabilities. Here is why they are wrong:
* The plan does not apply to the aged, blind and disabled until 1993, when the priority list would be reviewed to insure it meets the needs of those groups. Until then, disabled people who are eligible would continue to receive Medicaid.
* The Association for Retarded Citizens and other disabilities groups in Oregon worked closely with us in setting priorities. These groups support the Medicaid waiver.
* Oregon's plan would offer high-quality health care to many poor, disabled people who now have no health care at all because they aren't eligible for Medicaid.
* Neither the Federal Office of Technology Assessment nor the General Accounting Office raised concerns about possible violations of the disabilities law in their rigorous reports on the Oregon plan. In fact the technology office said that if the plan showed a preference, it was for the prevention and treatment of disabilities.
* The Justice Department has not released an opinion on precisely how the plan violates the act.
In addition to its complaints over the act, the Bush Administration has expressed concern that the plan violates the "Baby Doe" laws that protect extremely premature babies. That's plain wrong. The food, water and medication prescribed by those laws are all covered under the plan.
Any one of the Administration's misperceptions could have been corrected with a simple phone call to Oregon. But no call ever came.
Oregon has a bold, innovative plan that offers high-quality health care to Oregonians. And the state still has more than 400,000 citizens without any health care at all. And we're just one of 50 states. How long do we and the rest of the nation have to wait for a fair, rational system of health care?
Barbara Roberts, a Democrat, is Governor of Oregon.
Even so, it's not another occasion to lament damned if you do, damned if you don't all over again. As Dr. Antonio Gotto, a cardiologist at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, explains, the association of these ailments with low cholesterol levels isn't necessarily evidence that low cholesterol causes them. There can be many explanations for low cholesterol. Alcoholics, for instance, are apt to have very low cholesterol levels -- and a higher than average association with homicide and suicide. But it is the alcoholism itself that is almost surely responsible for the low cholesterol, and not vice versa, given alcoholics' diets.
The new findings merit hard study and elaboration, not only to clarify an individual's possible confusion about cholesterol but about public policy as well. Medical authorities like the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and the American Heart Association are pushing for national dietary guidelines intended to lower average cholesterol levels.
Meanwhile, all that medicine knows
with certainty
is that people with high cholesterol run a high risk of dying of heart disease. The new studies, however fascinating, are no justification to run out for a New York strip steak and a side of fries.
G.M., which spent a whopping $3.4 billion last year on health care benefits, refuses comment. But it does insist that it has a right to require retirees to accept the same deal it offers working nonunion employees: a maximum payment of $750 a year for basic coverage, or no charge if they use G.M.'s own doctor network.
In some cases, a promise has been broken and the courts are available as a remedy. But in many more cases there is no bad faith. Employers find it increasingly difficult to juggle obligations to shareholders, pensioners and active workers.
Financial officers did a double take in the mid-80's when they began to project their future medical obligations. As a result they peppered future contracts with escape clauses that the courts have generally upheld. In January a Federal appeals court ruled that the new owners of a Milwaukee company could scrap their inherited medical plan because the company had never specifically promised coverage for life.
Some companies are trying to pare their bills by tightening up on pill-taking by retirees; Americans over 65 bought $16 billion of prescription and over-the-counter drugs last year. But that sort of nibble can hardly solve the problem.
As long as U.S. health policy remains piecemeal rather than comprehensive, millions of Americans will be sharing the fate of G.M.'s 40,000 workers -- stray victims of a jerry-built system.
G.M., which spent a whopping $3.4 billion last year on health care benefits, refuses comment. But it does insist that it has a right to require retirees to accept the same deal it offers working nonunion employees: a maximum payment of $750 a year for basic coverage, or no charge if they use G.M.'s own doctor network.
In some cases, a promise has been broken and the courts are available as a remedy. But in many more cases there is no bad faith. Employers find it increasingly difficult to juggle obligations to shareholders, pensioners and active workers.
Financial officers did a double take in the mid-80's when they began to project their future medical obligations. As a result they peppered future contracts with escape clauses that the courts have generally upheld. In January a Federal appeals court ruled that the new owners of a Milwaukee company could scrap their inherited medical plan because the company had never specifically promised coverage for life.
Some companies are trying to pare their bills by tightening up on pill-taking by retirees; Americans over 65 bought $16 billion of prescription and over-the-counter drugs last year. But that sort of nibble can hardly solve the problem.
As long as U.S. health policy remains piecemeal rather than comprehensive, millions of Americans will be sharing the fate of G.M.'s 40,000 workers -- stray victims of a jerry-built system.
Like every other state, Oregon rations medical care to poor families by excluding many of them from Medicaid coverage. The proposed plan would ration care a different way: Every poor resident would be covered, but only for the most effective procedures. To this end, the state ranked 709 medical procedures and decided it could afford to cover the first 587 on the list. The rankings reflected judgments about which treatments helped patients, disabled or not.
But Mr. Sullivan charged that the rankings also reflected community surveys about "quality of life" that reflected bias against the disabled. Yet he could point to only three examples, none convincing.
Besides, Oregon has demonstrated willingness to rid the plan of legal problems and to allay the fears of critics -- including child welfare advocates -- that it will cover fewer and fewer procedures over time. But the Administration didn't bother to notice.
An election year is an awkward moment for Washington to approve a program that would openly ration care and provide money for abortions. But Oregon, faced with tight budgets and no national health reform in sight, made a hard, honorable choice. Its decision to cover every poor person adequately, but not completely, may not be to everyone's liking. But without evidence of invidious discrimination, the choice ought to be Oregon's.
Clearly, abstinence is important. But if the board's emphasis on abstinence leads the schools to downplay the fact that many teen-agers are already sexually active, and need warnings about safe sex, the results could be tragic. Many who are now suffering from AIDS, and many who have died from it, contracted the disease as teen-agers.
Individual board members are not oblivious to these realities, but the majority's preoccupation with the details of AIDS education has become an obsession. It's one thing to insist that anyone invited into schools to talk about AIDS understand and comply with board policies. But why get so bogged down in line-by-line oversight of the pledge form? And why revise the pledge at a special meeting called while Chancellor Joseph Fernandez and two board members were out of town?
The board majority's confrontational tactics are guaranteed to split the board and further antagonize Mr. Fernandez, who has been one of the most effective chancellors in years. The majority's relentless focus on the minutiae of AIDS education makes reasonable discourse on other important education issues increasingly difficult.
Those are smart ideas. But Mr. Bush emasculated his plan by refusing to take the tax-related steps needed to make it work. He would not make the proposed tax credits large enough to guarantee affordable coverage. He would not limit the deductibility of premiums -- the best way to encourage consumers to choose cost-effective H.M.O.'s. And he wouldn't eliminate tax deductions for employer-based coverage if the company refused to join a purchasing cooperative.
In short, as serious Republicans know, the Bush plan promises much but delivers little.
Meanwhile, Governor Clinton hasn't even proposed a coherent plan, only oratory better calculated to appease important Congressional Democrats than to create sound policy.
The Governor has endorsed "play or pay," whereby employers would be required to play -- provide health insurance to workers -- or else pay a tax to enroll them in a public plan. Play-or-pay is, at best, a step toward universal coverage. But many experts believe the strategy is unworkable. In any event, it doesn't address the hard problem of controlling costs.
For that, Mr. Clinton favors global budgets. But he hasn't defined the term or said how budgets would be enforced. The obvious conjecture is that he wants to set a national limit on health care spending, backed by massive price controls. But knowledgeable Clinton advisers recoil at the prospect of running one of the largest sectors of the economy by government edict.
They are working to get around Mr. Clinton's pronouncement by defining it away and pushing him to adopt a "Jackson Hole global budget," referring to the group of health care experts who invented the term. The idea is to set, instead of a national target for physician and hospital fees, only the premium that providers would be allowed to charge for basic coverage. Because the premium would not vary with actual expenditures, Jackson Hole budgets would discourage doctors and hospitals from providing unnecessary procedures.
Take another look at the emerging debate: Governor Clinton's advisers are pushing him to use some of the same market forces -- competition among cost-conscious H.M.O.'s -- backed by Mr. Bush. And Mr. Bush's advisers are pushing tax measures built in to Mr. Clinton's play-or-pay formulation.
If this weren't a tense campaign season, that gap could be closed in 15 minutes of negotiation. Mr. Bush could drop his destructive no-tax pledge. Mr. Clinton could adopt Jackson Hole global budgets. And the country would gain a potentially splendid health care plan.
Citizens concerned about the health care crisis, and not just Californians, have good reason to hope for more from Governor Wilson. This measure offers an enviable standard for other states struggling with their own health care crises.
Under the Garamendi plan, residents would pay a payroll tax to a regional authority, or sponsor. The sponsor would negotiate with private managed-care providers, like health maintenance organizations, to offer everyone basic coverage at no additional cost. Residents would be free to buy more extensive plans through the sponsor, at their own expense.
The plan provides universal coverage, guaranteeing protection for the poor and the chronically ill. That alone warrants applause. Even better, this plan can contain zooming health care costs without the straitjacket of price controls.
The legislature would decide how much payroll tax is required -- which also set the premium for basic coverage. That would be a giant step toward cost control. Yet insurers would still have the flexibility to negotiate physician fees, treatment practices and hospital reimbursement. Because most coverage would be provided by prepaid managed-care plans, insurers would have strong financial incentive to make sure that diagnosis and treatment are not botched.
Mr. Garamendi has designed, and the Legislature adopted, a remarkably shrewd solution to the health care crisis. Governor Wilson willing, California can now benefit directly, and the rest of the country can benefit by its example.
Under a new Agriculture Department proposal, meat and poultry products would bear labels specifying the amount of fat, saturated fat, fiber, sodium and cholesterol. But the labels would omit clear information allowing consumers to evaluate the product in the context of the daily intake recommended for a healthy diet.
A hot dog package, for example, would disclose that each frankfurter contains five grams of saturated fat -- an amount many consumers wouldn't recognize as high. The package would fudge on the fact that five grams is 25 percent of the maximum amount most Americans should consume per day.
Last year the Agriculture Department headed off Congressional action mandating a uniform format by agreeing to go along with the F.D.A.'s more forthcoming approach. By now proposing to disguise the true nutritional profile of meat products, the department invites Congress to reconsider.
That would have involved the total cooperation of the New York City police force, the District Attorney's office, the courts and the staff of a major New York hospital.
But it was not the worst of its kind. After all, we sat through "J.F.K." and survived even that intellectually insulting conspiratorial claptrap.
What bothered me about "Bob Roberts" was that it kept snickering at the attempt to fight drugs, making it all part of right-wing propaganda, just something to con the polyester crowd.
Coming out into the pollution of New York, which seemed like mountain air, I thought that Hollywood was right -- we really are political morons.
Neither Presidential candidate considers the American Age of Addiction important enough to make it a major part of his campaign. The suckers who march from ticket booth to voting booth don't even protest as they shell out their admission money or their votes.
Of course sometimes Americans do rouse themselves enough to open a brain cell to the addictions sickening our national bloodstream. That happens when one of our kids becomes a junkie, or a father dies of tobacco cancer, or a baby is beaten to death by an alcoholic mother -- or when a convicted drug peddler is shot by a cop in the worst drug building on the worst drug street in the worst drug neighborhood in New York and other drug crooks help the neighborhood go up in flames.
Mostly, Americans shake their heads about national addictions; that's all. So why should politicians give a damn?
But God was on my side, even though I do not belong to either party. The day after I saw the movie He helped me out of my depression by scheduling a lunch for me with Joe Califano.
Mr. Califano, a former Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, is convinced of this: The national disease of addiction has the U.S. stuck hard on gluey flypaper.
One reason the country cannot provide decent medical care is that the addicted clog hospitals and suck up their budgets. It cannot deal effectively with the AIDS spread by addled needle users, or with homelessness. He says the large majority of homeless are on the streets because of the helplessness that comes out of bottle and needle. Productivity is stamped down because so much time and money is sacrificed to illness and death from smokes, booze and junk.
Mr. Califano is putting his working life where his mouth is. He has become president of the new Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse, allied with Columbia University. With an endowment from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation he is putting together what should be a top staff.
The goal is to get America to see addiction whole, and in all its parts, to understand that 95 million of us are hooked on tobacco, alcohol, pot, heroin, barbiturates or crack, a loss to the country of $300 billion a year. The center will look at causes, treatments and programs, and spread word of what works best among teachers, coaches, parents, kids, businessmen, police, doctors.
The center can be a sophisticated and important operation against drugs and other addictions. But the rest of us must not make it our escape hole from responsibility.
Other foundations and companies that could contribute to existing efforts against drugs must not hold back waiting for some more White Papers, which we need like holes in the head. The heat must not come off government and politicians: more heat, more. Therapy centers dealing with drug addicts should not find that funds and attention are dwindling or channeled away.
With a little luck and a lot of work, the center will turn into a good sharp spur in the flanks of government, politicians and the nation. It could help stanch some of the blood that addiction is draining out of the country.
That strikes me as a good way to spend a working lifetime, Mr. Roberts.
Individuals who have had a stroke battle against the twin demons of frustration and depression. Their recovery period is maddeningly gradual. Some remain permanently incapacitated and unable to care for themselves. I am fortunate to have had sufficient recovery that I am physically independent; my ability to speak, however, demands great effort and is limited to short utterances.
The stroke happened in September 1990 at a time when I could take delight in my good health and vigor as a widower of 80 years young. I had recently met Marjorie Neikrug, curator of a photographic gallery and the woman who would become my wife.
On Sept. 29, a Saturday, Marge and I went to the funeral of a union leader at St. Patrick's Cathedral. We walked home and had lunch, planning to catch a train for Spring Valley to visit Marge's daughter. We never did.
During lunch I noticed that my right arm was getting heavier and heavier; then I passed out. Marge realized I was in trouble and pushed me back into my chair. The ambulance took me to the emergency room of New York Hospital, just a few blocks from home. There, a CAT scan confirmed that I had suffered a cerebral vascular accident -- in layman's terms, a stroke -- caused by an embolism blocking the blood flow to the main artery feeding the brain.
An experimental drug, Eminase, was administered and prevented further damage within the left brain hemisphere in an area that controls speech, reading, comprehension and writing. The medical term for this disorder is aphasia. An estimated one million Americans suffer it.
I was shell-shocked and disoriented, unaware of what was happening to me. I desperately wanted to make sense of the confusion, but every time I tried to express myself nothing came out. I was forced to remain silent and could not follow either verbal or written commands. Words sounded to me like jargon, as though the people around me spoke a foreign tongue. I could neither comprehend nor use language. In addition, the stroke left my right arm and leg semi-paralyzed. I lay in bed, staring blankly and feeling helpless.
Over the next few days my doctors recorded marked improvement in my strength. The most notable and rapid accomplishment was to walk without any assistance. After long and tedious hours spent with Marge, during which she rotated my legs and, most importantly, gave me encouragement, it was a blessing to be able to walk to her once again.
My understanding of simple conversation also seemed to be returning. I began to produce what I thought were words, but the puzzled look on the faces of my audience showed me that my long-awaited words were nothing more than gibberish. Then, little by little, people began reacting to my vocalizations. Imagine my relief at again being able to express my basic needs with a single word like "eat," "drink" or "toilet." Each utterance involved deep concentration and struggle to produce a somewhat intelligible word. Each "new" word was received with elation by my family and friends, motivating me to go on. A baby must be excited like that when he utters his first "mama" and "dada."
It is difficult to convey the depth of my emotional solitude. I did not feel like A. H. Raskin. I now had a new self, a person who no longer could use words with mastery. Privately I could do nothing but cry. With the tears came feelings of anxiety and depression. I wavered between feelings of melancholy and hope.
The desire to achieve, to succeed, to win, to regain my confidence manifested itself in the practice that Marge and I incorporated into our daily routine. Every night I challenge her to a game. It has become our happy hour as we play and joke. Whether it's dominoes, bingo or backgammon, there is one rule: Marge can't win and I can't lose. I'm such a sorehead.
The speech therapy, which I continued on a daily basis as an outpatient at the Rusk Institute of Rehabilitative Medicine, was a laborious and disturbing battle. My body was nearly back to normal, but I felt that a black hole was swallowing my speech. Would it be realistic to assume that the complete physical recuperation would lead to a total re-emergence of my language skills? Would this daily grind pay off? I persisted and the therapists pushed me to do more.
My speech clarity was poor because of weak facial muscles, so I had to focus on improving my articulation skills. I sat before a mirror with Debbie, my therapist, intently studying each movement of her mouth and trying to imitate her with as much accuracy as possible. I was drilled to respond to word retrieval tasks such as finding opposites, sentence production and sentence formulation.
Reading was just as difficult. The printed word at first resembled hieroglyphics. Later, individual words became recognizable and took on meaning, but I could not decipher a printed statement. Looking at a group of words was overwhelming. It was as though the words were catapulting off the page and I could not make sense of their significance. The therapist presented two words, three words, four words and more until I graduated to sentences. I felt mournful and frightened, then tense, anxious and full of rage. Yet I knew that I had to get back on that horse.
Initially, when I tried to write my name, I just scribbled. Slowly, by copying the letters over and over, it began to come back to me. Spelling was no longer automatic. I was drilled to put down letters and words to dictation, finish the spelling of incomplete words and look for errors in misspelled words. Gradually I combined words in order to form sentences, although I tended to omit the articles and prepositions. Verb tense was yet another chore. I had to rethink all of the irregular and plural forms before printing it out.
I now realize that my vocation in life has changed. Now I represent the one million Americans who cannot speak for themselves. My plight and theirs are one: to inform the public that those of us who have lost the ability to invent fluent phrases or sentences have not lost the ability to think. We retain the skill to communicate our thoughts and feelings, whether through writing, picture boards, pantomime or facial expression. We can still speak! We hope that you will listen with your ears, with your eyes and always with your heart.
A. H. Raskin was deputy editor of the editorial page of The Times from 1964 until his retirement in 1976. A longer version of this article appears in the current issue of Martha's Vineyard magazine.
Food products would still be covered by the new regulations, so the amendment -- sponsored by Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah -- sets up a confusing inconsistency. Makers of dietary supplements would be free to appeal to health-conscious consumers with fraudulent claims that their product could, say, reduce heart disease. Cereal manufacturers would have to show scientific evidence to the F.D.A. before making the same claim. The unsubstantiated claims might encourage people to ingest a larger quantity of a dietary supplement than is considered safe.
The issue now moves to a conference committee. By eliminating the Hatch amendment, the committee can protect consumers and avoid quackery.
The challenge to 98.6 is based on a study of 148 healthy Baltimoreans. There is no apparent explanation for the difference, and indeed no explanation of why the mercury has come to rest at 98.6 all these years if it should have been stopping at 98.2.
It's enough to make five billion earthlings wonder if they can believe in anything at all.
The plan attempts to contain costs by marrying price controls and competition. That's an enlightened, challenging idea. But it is doomed to fail.
Health care is an $800 billion industry. It embraces thousands of price decisions involving constantly changing procedures. That's why it is folly for the plan to center on price controls. To ask a Government that can't manage deposit insurance to control health care invites chaos and corruption.
The plan's novel impetus for managed care won't work much better. Under fee-for-service contracts, insurers have little contact with physicians other than to pay the bills. So they can't control treatment practices and, under the plan, can't control fees.
But the H.M.O.'s that hire their own doctors and run their own hospitals would be exempt from price controls. That fact, combined with the tight control H.M.O.'s exercise over their doctors, would give them a mighty competitive advantage. H.M.O.'s could, for example, streamline treatments to save money, then use the savings to attract the best doctors by paying high salaries.
But merely promoting H.M.O.'s isn't enough. H.M.O.'s can't be trusted to provide first-rate coverage unless the market is carefully structured, a feature glaringly absent from the physicians' plan. That's unfortunate, because there is a model for organizing competition among H.M.O.'s. It comes from the Jackson Hole Group, a loose body of health-care experts.
It is called managed competition, and under it, individuals would be combined in large groups -- often at the workplace -- and represented by a sophisticated buyer, known as a sponsor. The sponsor is key because it sets the ground rules that prevent H.M.O.'s from selling inappropriate policies, skimping on quality or discriminating against the chronically ill. The physicians build in no such structure.
The physicians spent several years drawing up their plan. It shows; the plan offers some inventive ideas. For example, it offers excellent ways to make mandatory health insurance affordable to small business. But at its core, the plan breaks down because neither price controls nor unstructured markets can solve the health-care crisis.
Magic Johnson's celebrity was just the right spark for the AIDS battle. His criticism forced a pledge from Mr. Bush "to go the extra mile." But a year later, there are still miles to go. More counseling and testing programs are needed to handle the infected population. Intravenous drug users are the major source of infection, but drug treatment is in short supply. Vital studies of teen-age sexual conduct have been shelved because of objections by conservatives.
Mr. Johnson said yesterday, "I have been increasingly frustrated by the lack of support, and even opposition, of your Administration to our recommendations -- recommendations which have an urgent priority and for which there is a broad consensus in the medical and AIDS communities."
President Bush's spokesmen responded that funding for AIDS had more than doubled under Mr. Bush and that Magic Johnson had failed to recognize "the tremendous commitment and compassion" of the Administration.
But that's confusing money with commitment. Sadly, the President has failed to exert the moral leadership needed to combat the epidemic. All the more reason for Magic Johnson to keep his own drive and charisma in the fight against AIDS.
Congressional efforts to preserve such politically sensitive programs threaten to stifle an essential but less visible component of the N.I.H.'s mission -- free-ranging studies of the fundamental properties of cells. For the first time in recent memory, Congress is reducing the Administration's request for funds for biomedical research. This means basic research is likely to be squeezed.
Under the Senate bill, the fiscal ax is placed on the neck of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences, the N.I.H. component that supports work on the basic principles of cell biology and genetics. That institute, which traditionally receives less than 10 percent of the N.I.H. budget, would absorb the largest cut -- about $38 million less than originally requested by the Administration, with much of the withheld money reallocated to other, more focused purposes. More, not less, financing is needed for unrestrained basic research.
Like most Americans, we have lost close friends and relatives to cancer and other diseases, and we understand the pain that leads people to fight for money to study the disease that has most affected their lives. But we are convinced that the most effective long-term approach to improving health lies in fostering the research that increases understanding of genes and tissues. Basic biomedical science cannot promise specific cures in a defined time, but a general understanding of cells will lead to cures for many diseases.
Fundamental research has provided countless dividends. New tools for detecting genetic derangements in tumor cells, for attacking tumors with novel antibodies and for protecting normal cells during chemotherapy are beginning to change the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Prospects for the early diagnosis and therapy of cystic fibrosis has been dramatically improved by the isolation of the gene that causes it.
These advances and many others would have been impossible without recombinant DNA technology. Development of methods for recombining DNA was a direct outgrowth of studies of bacterial genes and enzymes -- the sort of work most vulnerable to the budgetary knife today.
America remains the world leader in basic biomedical research because of enlightened policies that have encouraged investigators to try to unscramble the huge puzzle represented by each cell. In cells from the liver, lungs, brain and other tissues, more than 10,000 proteins work together to perform many chemical functions. Research that increases our understanding of these processes in each cell is the foundation on which new therapies for diseases will be based.
Unscrambling the puzzle of the cell cannot be done well by financing focused on specific diseases. What works best is a system in which the choice of research projects is not imposed by Congress and is free of specified methods, materials and goals.
The National Institute of General Medical Sciences subscribes completely to the unfettered approach. Those who make appropriations should appreciate that research on specific diseases will suffer if they do not sustain the basic science that feeds it.
Harold E. Varmus was co-winner of the 1989 Nobel Prize in medicine. Marc W. Kirschner is a former president of the American Society for Cell Biology.
The reason is politics. Law requires the Legislature's approval to close a state hospital. Yet regional lawmakers and labor unions, fearing lost jobs and revenue, have resisted such closings.
Even as the mental hospital population declined from 93,000 in the 1950's to 11,000 today, the number of hospitals actually
increased
from 18 to 22. Two-thirds of the state's mental health budget remains tied up in the hospitals. Meanwhile community services to help the 170,000 mental patients who are not in hospitals continue to beg for funds.
Albany's fiscal problems have recently begun to outweigh the provincial pressure. Gov. Mario Cuomo now supports Mental Health Commissioner Richard Surles's plans to consolidate patients and close hospitals. But the Legislature continues to balk over Gowanda, with its 44 jobs.
Defenders of the hospital argue that all its patients require acute care not available nearby, and that the expense is in line with such care in other settings. But that's no reason to defer closure: an equivalent number of psychiatric beds are being created in general hospitals in the area.
Shifting the patients there would bring them under coverage by Medicaid, the Federal health insurance not available in freestanding state mental hospitals. As a result, the state Office of Mental Health would save three-fourths of the $2.9 million it now costs to keep Gowanda open -- enough to finance 128 sorely needed places for homeless mental patients in community programs.
That is surely a wiser policy than retaining Gowanda and other little-used hospitals as the white elephants of mental health.
But now managed competition stands at the center of the health-care plans proposed by both President Bush and Gov. Bill Clinton. President Bush proposed a managed-competition plan in February. Governor Clinton took longer. During the primaries he seemed to favor price controls to keep costs down. And earlier this month he wavered between managed competition and price controls.
But this week the Governor released a crystal-clear statement: "Managed competition,
not price controls,
will make the budget work and maintain quality." Price controls would be used only during a "transition" in places where health maintenance organizations haven't developed.
The Bush and Clinton campaigns have seized on managed competition because it's the only reform that has a realistic chance to control costs as coverage is extended to millions of uninsured Americans. In contrast, the current unregulated markets allow insurers to discriminate against the chronically ill. And full-scale government regulation would require Washington to run a huge market, nearly the size of Britain's, with thousands of price controls; that's bureaucratic folly.
Managed competition, as designed by Alain Enthoven of Stanford University, artfully combines competition and regulation. Individuals would join large groups and be represented by a sophisticated buyer, known as a sponsor. The sponsor would require insurers to compete by providing high-quality care without discriminating against the chronically ill.
The insurers would in many cases be health maintenance organizations, charging prepaid premiums independent of how many services the enrollee actually uses. That would give H.M.O.'s a ferocious incentive to keep enrollees healthy, rather than profiting -- as under fee-for-service plans -- when they are ill. And because H.M.O.'s supervise doctors and hospitals, they exercise tremendous control over quality and costs. For example, H.M.O.'s can concentrate surgical procedures in specific hospitals, the best way to prevent mishaps.
Congress now faces a delicious prospect: Come January it can start with a managed competition blueprint, dot the i's and send the President, whether his name is Clinton or Bush, a bill he'd be proud to sign.
The problems caused by this debacle were documented in a five-part series in The New York Times this week. The number of new TB cases nationwide jumped from 22,000 in 1985 to almost 27,000 last year -- 3,700 in New York City alone. Worse yet, many of the new cases are resistant to one or more drugs used to treat TB. As many as half these patients will die of the disease, and many will spread their resistant strains to others.
The Bush Administration is spending tens of millions of dollars a year on TB control, but still far less than the $540 million called for by top health officials. New York City will spend more than $100 million next year, mostly for a prison TB unit and clinic improvements. And it is speeding the hiring of health workers.
But much more is needed, including a long-term care facility for very sick or uncooperative patients, housing for homeless TB victims, and more outreach workers to track down infected individuals and make sure they take their medicine every day. The resistant strains proliferate largely because many patients fail to complete the full 6-to-24-month course of medication.
These programs will cost money. But the sad history of this needless epidemic shows the folly of scrimping on disease control.
But while these cultural phenomena are indeed sending women into politics, American demographics and natural biological forces are motivating them, too.
The demographic factor is well known: the age wave. Seventy-six million Americans were born between 1946 and 1964. Hail the baby boom, a mass production following World War II. These men and women have been moving through society like a pig through a python, changing social life since they were born. Their interests have been the country's issues.
Now, as boomer women enter midlife, menopause has become one of their concerns. Two generational spokeswomen, Gail Sheehy and Germaine Greer, have recently written books on the subject. Though the books broke new ground, another point needs to be made. In concert with the age wave, this change in female biology will certainly contribute to women's rise to political power.
As menopause proceeds, levels of the female hormone estrogen steadily decline -- unmasking natural levels of testosterone. Testosterone is one of nature's potent cocktails. The predominantly male hormone is linked with assertiveness in animals and people. Scientists have established that men (and male monkeys) of high rank often have elevated testosterone levels.
In many societies, middle-aged women (with relatively high levels of testosterone) gain influence in political, religious, economic and social life. As Margaret Mead once said, "There is no greater power in the world than the zest of a post-menopausal woman." So it is likely that boomer women will attain authoritative political positions as well.
Certainly, there are cultural reasons for women's midlife rise in status. Released from the constant chores of rearing children, menopausal women are freer to pursue activities outside the home. But biology, in this case, is working in their favor. How ironic, too, given the fact that science has historically been used to bar women from power. Menstrual cycles made us unreliable in combat, biology left us unfit to lead.
Will a rise in women's activism affect our home lives, too? While some things will be different, gender relations are unlikely to change as much as one might expect. Power in one segment of society does not necessarily translate into power across the board. For example, women who work outside the home still find themselves doing most of the housework. This is true around the world: even in cultures where women are politically and economically powerful, they still do most domestic chores.
Moreover, even if American women become much more powerful in politics, it's unlikely the sexes will be at each other's throats. Again, biology may play a role. As middle-aged women exhibit more assertiveness, middle-aged men display less of it. Men's testosterone levels peak when they're in their 20's; then the amount of the hormone steadily declines. This helps explain why men become more nurturing as they age.
Could the war between the sexes ebb as the genders mature? Given the cultural and biological forces that work together to build and break relationships, it's unlikely that a general rise in women's political power will dramatically alter women as wives and lovers.
Nevertheless, "the year of the woman" is here to stay. In fact, it may well be the decade of the woman. Society has positioned women to rise in political power. And the biological changes wrought by menopause will bolster their interest in power and increase their ability to use it. As usual, culture and nature go hand in hand.
Helen E. Fisher, an anthropologist at the American Museum of Natural History, is author of "Anatomy of Love: The Natural History of Monogamy, Adultery and Divorce."
Depo-Provera, which is nearly 100 percent effective, is already in use in 90 countries and has been for a long time. But it can have side effects, among them weight gain and menstrual irregularities. It may also contribute to osteoporosis. But fears that it might cause breast cancer appear to have been stilled or mitigated by a large-scale study under the World Health Organization.
Some health advocates fear, as they did with Norplant, that this new contraceptive will be pushed on low-income patients since it is easy to use and assures compliance. Coercion of that kind would make an aid to reproductive choice for all women seem dangerously like a restriction on poor ones.
Such concerns bear watching. But Depo-Provera looks like a valuable addition to the all-too-short list of contraceptive choices available to American women.
President-elect Clinton now needs to embrace priorities every bit as urgently as Candidate Clinton was quick to make promises. The task is to concentrate Congress's attention on the highest priorities and leave the rest for later.
Jobs and Investment.
In the Presidential debate in St. Louis, Mr. Clinton said: ". . . my first priority would be to pass a jobs program, to introduce it on the first day I was inaugurated." He was right, then and now. The best way to jump-start the economy would be to accelerate his plan to invest $80 billion in infrastructure. Another way would be to pass a temporary tax credit for businesses willing to increase investment in plant and equipment. Accelerated spending and temporary tax cuts would be self-liquidating; Wall Street need not fear increasing long-term deficits.
Health Care. Responding to voter anxiety, Mr. Clinton put health care reform at the center of his campaign. His proposed answer -- managed competition -- is the best solution known for the dual challenge of too few people covered and too many billions spent.
Education and Training.
What distinguished the Clinton program was its forward-looking emphasis on educating and training workers -- the surest ticket to vigorous growth. To fulfill this pledge, the President-elect could take the first steps toward apprenticeship training for non-college-bound students and on-the-job training for low-skilled workers.
Campaign Finance Reform.
Mr. Clinton owes voters an overhaul of the political process, awash in corrupting campaign contributions, no matter what some wary advisers warn. The risks of disgusting the public outweigh the risks of irritating party leaders.
For all his promises, promises, if Mr. Clinton can advance these priorities he could rightly claim success, success. PROMISES, PROMISES: BUT WHICH ONES?
Here are some Clinton campaign proposals that would have significant impact on the Federal budget.  Training and Education
Impose a 1.5 percent payroll tax on large employers to finance training and education for low-skilled workers.
Increase Federal spending on education and training generally by $10 billion a year starting in 1993 and $20 billion a year by 1996.
Create a national service trust fund to give every American the right to borrow money for college
Guaranteed apprenticeships for half of all students not going to college. Health Care
Create a new system of universal health care for all.
Extend Medicare to cover long-term care.  Infrastructure and Technology
Inject $20 billion a year in transportation, communications and environment, to stimulate growth and to revitalize essential systems.
Create a civilian advanced technology agency.
Establish 170 manufacturing extension centers to help smaller businesses choose equipment and learn cutting-edge techniques. Urban Development
Create 100 commnity development banks and 1000 micro-enterprise programs to help small businesses and revitalize communities.
Establish from 75 to 125 urban enterprise zones.
Increase community devlopment block grants. Tax Cuts
Create a targeted investment tax credit.
Reduce personal income taxes for some number of middle Americans, costing $22 billion over four years.
Raise the earned income tax credit for the working poor.
Create tax incentives and credits for recycling and pollution reduction. Crime
Establish a Police Corps to train 10,000 new officers a year for ten years.
Help states create and operate boot camp prisons. Social Policy
Boost poor children by fully funding Head Start and the WIC health program
Make permanent the low-income housing tax credit.  International
Increase contributions to the World Bank.
Increase assistance to Russia.
Pay overdue U.S. dues to the United Nations.
It seems outrageous that a worker can have health benefits virtually wiped out at the boss's whim at the very moment those benefits are desperately needed. As the Justice Department conceded even as it urged the Supreme Court not to hear the case, when Mr. McGann lost the coverage he thought he had, he had also suddenly become uninsurable elsewhere.
But there's also a larger injustice exposed in this case: the inadequate health care system in this rich nation.
The problem stems from the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, which allows two-thirds of the nation's health plans to be unilaterally changed in this manner. Congress deliberately gave self-insured companies the flexibility to stave off claims from catastrophic illnesses that could bankrupt businesses, injuring all workers.
The law protects workers against discrimination for exercising their rights, but in most health plans the worker's expectation is trumped by the employer's exclusive right to modify the terms. Mr. McGann's employer, a small retail chain, surely had that right. What made the case especially angering was that the company drastically reduced health coverage only after Mr. McGann got sick and applied the reduction to his claims.
If the law can't help people like Mr. McGann, should Congress change the law? Yes, but the fix won't be simple. The crux of the problem isn't callous employers but rather a system that relies on employers to insure workers voluntarily.
Some in Congress would forbid employers to unilaterally cut coverage. But faced with open-ended liability, and threat of financial ruin, many small employers would cancel all health insurance. That would victimize tens of millions of workers, and yield no relief for Mr. McGann or others in his tragic circumstance.
There are proposals in Congress to handle rare cases like Mr. McGann's, by preventing businesses from cutting coverage for workers already suffering from a particular illness. But even this limited protection must be handled carefully lest even a single claim bankrupt a small company. Besides, it leaves everyone else at work vulnerable to arbitrary cutbacks.
The only honest answer is a big answer: comprehensive reform that guarantees all Americans insurance no matter what their medical condition. Congress might put the burden on employers to insure workers; or it might require individuals to buy coverage from public or private insurers. Once everybody's covered Congress could protect those who suffer medical catastrophes.
President-elect Clinton put health care reform at the center of his campaign for good reason. Otherwise there will be more Mr. McGanns getting sick and only then finding there's no insurance.
The people who commiserate with its owner -- a wailing pharmacy of tissues, lozenges, a cough suppressant and some little red pills -- tell her it must be "that virus that's going around." Or that she could have pneumonia and not know it. Or tuberculosis, which they hear is staging a comeback. One person, on being told of an unrelated rash, mentioned measles. All of them rejected her own diagnosis. In an age of complexity, the common cold is an unacceptable simplicity.
But this person, like others visited with the same complaint,
knows her cold
. She knows there is no cure on earth and in heaven (well, maybe heaven), and that she might as well resign herself to having been taken over by a hostile bug.
She also knows she'd be getting more sympathy if she were suffering from something more interesting. Saddest of all, she can visualize her premature (people with colds are always presumed to be gold-bricking -- even by themselves) return to work. It won't be a "welcome back" that greets her but a "don't sit by me."
The F.D.A.'s food labeling revision covers 5,000 pages. But as health advocates observe, the dispute really boils down to just one word: fat.
Mr. Madigan objects to a labeling format that shows consumers how a product's fat, saturated fat and cholesterol fit into a healthy 2,000-calorie diet. He prefers a less informative label that disguises the fat content of many products that contain meat. He also wants a more lenient definition of "light" that would preserve that term for undeserving high-fat products.
Why Mr. Madigan should have any say over the F.D.A.'s regulations is a mystery. The Congressional mandate for more honest food labeling covers only foods regulated by the F.D.A. -- not meat and poultry products, which Agriculture regulates.
A year ago Mr. Madigan promised to bring his own labeling policies into harmony with the new F.D.A. rules. Instead he's chosen to lobby against proposed labels for foods over which he has no jurisdiction. If Congress wanted the nation's cattlemen and hog farmers to dictate health policy, it would have said so.
Anticipating just this sort of impasse, Congress included a provision, called "the hammer," that automatically put a preliminary F.D.A. proposal of a year ago into effect once last week's deadline for adopting the new rules passed.
The draft proposal would also restrict the use of widely misused terms like "less" and "light." But the new rules would serve the public better, primarily by simplifying the definition of key label terms. The food industry would also benefit, because the revised rules provide some extra time to redesign and print new labels.
Mr. Madigan's intervention has put the issue in uncharted legal waters. But even though the statutory deadline has passed, there's a good case that Mr. Bush could make the new F.D.A. regulations stick, if he allowed for a brief comment period.
To do nothing, or to try to modify the F.D.A. rules at this late date, would almost surely invite litigation and fresh scrutiny by the Clinton Administration. That risks postponing a valuable health benefit for many months, while frittering away a positive part of Mr. Bush's domestic legacy.
For Ms. Success, imprisonment may seem just another part of the personal nightmare that followed last year's coup in her native Haiti. But for Americans who believe our country still stands for something special, it should be a reminder that disgraceful treatment of immigrants is not merely an exhibit at an artfully restored Ellis Island.
Ms. Success is in jail only because she is H.I.V. positive, that "little problem" the doctor mentioned when she was held at the American naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, a latter-day leprosarium for Haitian refugees infected with the AIDS virus.
She says she did not know what her blood problem was until Ricardo died on Sept. 15, a little over three months after he was born. She was told that he had died as a result of H.I.V. infection, although Ms. Success believes otherwise. She says that after his birth she was billeted with him in a large open tent during several days of rain and that he developed a bad cold. She says that when soldiers stormed through their living quarters one day, the baby was hit on the side of the head by a helmet.
"After that he would not take my milk," Ms. Success said in Creole through an interpreter.
Her son died at Walter Reed Hospital in Washington D.C., where he and his mother had been sent from Guantanamo when his health deteriorated, and afterward Ms. Success became something of an immigration problem. Since the United States is one of the few nations in the world that excludes aliens who are H.I.V. positive as public health risks, her blood test made her inadmissible for entry.  But she was already here. And she had a fine case for political asylum in the deaths of her parents, who were supporters of the ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
In an America obsessed with domestic malaise, the travails of the Haitians have been little noticed and less lamented. When George Bush decreed in May that we should turn back their boats, few evoked the shameful day in 1939 when the liner St. Louis was forced to return to Europe -- and many of its Jewish passengers to move on to concentration camps and death -- because it was denied permission to dock here.  Perhaps it will require the long lens of history to understand how many Haitians died because we saw them only as faceless black problems.
Here there is a face, a broad one with penciled brows, a 22-year-old seamstress with a passionate mien and a baby buried in Maryland. She has law students from American University and Yale and lawyers from the university law clinics and the Center for Constitutional Rights working on her case. She has two church organizations ready to offer her a place to live.
But she also has an existence run by the I.N.S., an organization that lives and dies by procedure and that deals very poorly indeed with individuals, otherwise known as people. One official said there was no reason to handcuff Ms. Success as guards have in the past, but couldn't promise that it wouldn't happen again. When she was strip-searched, she says, she was told: "This was a mistake. Please don't tell your lawyers."
President-elect Clinton has pledged to change the policy that sent Haitians back with no attempt to determine whether they had legitimate cases for asylum. And he has said that he will remove H.I.V. infection as a bar to immigration.
But Ms. Success should not have to wait. The Government may allow her to leave the Varick Street Detention Center at any time. The time is now. She should be set free for her own sake, it is true, so that she can begin to build a life out of the utter ashes of her old one. But perhaps she should be set free for our sake as well, so that we can begin to become again the kind of country that puts people in jail for doing wrong, not for getting sick.
The bill would add an estimated $160 million a year to premiums of Blue Cross and Blue Shield subscribers. It would drive up health care costs, at a time when those skyrocketing costs are already the number one domestic financial crisis. By adding to insurance costs the bill would drive some employers to drop group insurance, leaving families vulnerable to financial disaster from the next medical catastrophe.
The bill should make chiropractors deliriously happy. Once workers are covered for an unlimited range of services, they can be expected to start using them. And even though employers pay the premiums, they take the extra costs out of each worker's paycheck.
This bill reeks of special pleading. Governor Cuomo: Show no mercy.
Why the contradiction? Mr. Clinton evidently fears that competition alone can't do the job. Yet he must realize that trying to run the $800 billion health care industry by government fiat is folly. Price controls would spawn bureaucracy and wholesale evasion. Worse yet, they would rob health care providers of the drive to innovate that now distinguishes the U.S. health care system.
There is a way out of this quandary, but only if Mr. Clinton owns up to the contradiction and reaches out for the remedy that's already at hand.
Clinton advisers have tried, so far without success, to explain away the contradiction. Sometimes they say price controls on physicians and hospitals wouldn't undermine competition because controls would apply only during a transition period. At other times they, and their principal, declare that global budgets and price controls are central.  Which is it?
The advisers also minimize the impact of price controls on H.M.O.'s. These controls, they say, are not rigid limits on thousands of medical procedures but merely harmless ceilings on annual premiums.  That defense is also hard to follow.
If such ceilings were set below what H.M.O.'s would otherwise charge, they'd jeopardize quality, innovation, even survival. If, alternatively, the ceiling were set above the amount competitive H.M.O.'s would charge, they'd be an irrelevance.
The question remains: Can Mr. Clinton marry global budgets and managed competition?
John Garamendi, California's Insurance Commissioner, proposes a shrewd answer. His plan for California would set up regional purchasing agents, or sponsors. These sponsors, each representing perhaps several hundred thousand consumers, would drive hard bargains with private insurers, mostly H.M.O.'s. That's managed competition. Then he adds an ingenious twist: a market-driven payroll tax that fixes the cost of basic coverage.
Every company and worker would pay a payroll tax to the sponsor. The sponsor would then find at least two insurers willing to offer, for the amount already paid to the sponsor, basic benefits to every applicant. People would be free to buy more lavish coverage, but at their own expense.
This health care tax would add the fiscal discipline Mr. Clinton seeks from his global budget. Indeed, it's perfectly reasonable to describe such a cap on annual premiums as "global budgeting." The difference is that the Clinton plan would be driven by bureaucrats. The Garamendi plan would be driven by market forces.
If government tried to set the tax below the cost of health care, no qualified insurer would be willing to offer coverage.
The beauty of the Garamendi plan is that it doesn't require price controls and leaves providers plenty of room to compete. Under the plan, competition squeezes out wasteful practices and holds down prices. The obvious political difficulty of raising the payroll tax imposes another, powerful discipline against loading up basic benefits with unimportant coverage.
In short, the Garamendi plan does honest global budgeting. It is wholly compatible with the principles of managed competition. And it shows Mr. Clinton the way out of contradiction and into health care reform that matches his promises.
The idea of managed competition is to give consumers effective purchasing power by enrolling them in large cooperatives. Representing hundreds of thousands of people each, these would be able to negotiate favorable deals with hospitals, doctors and insurers.
It might seem odd, then, for doctors and insurers to embrace the idea. Odd, until one considers the likely alternative: government takeover. Mr. Clinton promised radical reform that would guarantee coverage to every American at affordable rates. Managed competition is the only reform that can deliver on his promise while preserving an effective role for private insurers and doctors.
With that threat in mind, the insurers' association now calls for the Government to define the basic package of health care benefits each American would receive. The insurers also propose limiting tax deductions for health care premiums to a fixed-dollar amount -- the best way to encourage consumers to choose cost-effective insurance.
But at that point, enlightened self-interest plummets into selfish interest. The insurers call for uniform rates that insurers pay to doctors and hospitals. This provision is justified as a way to contain costs. What it would really do is crush competition.
By standardizing fees, the small insurers who dominated the vote within the association shamelessly hope to strip large rivals of their competitive edge. That's why Cigna and several other large insurers criticized last week's announcement and have recently withdrawn from the association.
The American Medical Association, with 290,000 members, now also piously embraces competition. But in the next breath it urges the opposite: a guaranteed right for doctors to join several health care plans in the same region. Huh? If physicians can belong to several plans, those plans would have little incentive to compete -- removing the competition from managed competition.
Despite such contradictions, these new announcements signal truly welcome news. For the first time, insurers and doctors, two of the most powerful elements in the system, have put themselves on the side of change.
Indeed, their repositioning reflects the singular beauty of managed competition: Because it preserves private enterprise, it invites political compromise. That's why insurers and doctors alike now accept the principle, and why the National Governors Association does too. Managed competition is turning out to be not only the best reform, but probably the only viable reform.
They met at a conference sponsored by the University of Minnesota's Center for Biomedical Ethics. All have sorrow and landmark legal cases in common. But they share something else as well: anger at the doctors who couldn't or wouldn't tell them all they really needed to know about their tragically ill relatives.
Their complaints ("The doctors tended to run away" . . . "One doctor told me there was nothing to talk about" . . . "it was three years before we finally got a formalized prognosis") were echoed by others. "We wanted help but we didn't know what to ask," one parent lamented, urging that hospitals appoint liaisons between families and physicians.
One doctor who spoke was Dr. Carlos Gomez, not long out of medical school. "You can't graduate without knowing how to resuscitate," he said, "but you don't know how to help a dying patient."
Dr. Gomez posed a challenge to the medical establishment. "Teach us how to be good doctors," he said, by which he seemed to mean: Teach us how to be as good at helping patients and their families as we are at our specialties. That challenge could be an essential element of any reform in America's health care.
And the story she tells makes no sense from that vantage point, either. How she went into a basement three years ago with an audience of teen-age boys and masturbated and performed oral sex. How she heard them yell "further, further" as her head was pushed down into someone's lap. How she let one put a broomstick and another a bat into her vagina. How she didn't tell anyone right away even though her "bottom" hurt afterward when she went to the bathroom. How she still thinks of the four who are on trial here as her friends, "sort of."
It only makes sense if you take away 15 years. Think of her as a needy 6-year-old, wanting desperately to be liked. Think of her as an anxious 6-year-old, afraid of giving the wrong answer, but still not entirely sure what the answers are. They say she is mildly retarded and has the mental capacity of an 8-year-old, but 6 is more like what she seemed when she was testifying last week, 6 and childlike about most things except the crudest terms of a "sexual nature."
"What does that mean?" she said when a defense attorney used those last two words during cross-examination.
You've probably known someone like her and like the boys now on trial, charged with a group assault that one witness, who couldn't stomach it and left, likened to watching piranhas feed. The defendants are the superlatives from your yearbook, all broad shoulders, varsity letters and smooth haircuts. The Jock Kings, who can act as they please, and often do.
She, on the other hand, is the one we knew as the slow kid. Dummy. Retard. You remember the nasty names. Her sister testified that when they were all little, two of the defendants, twins named Kyle and Kevin Scherzer, were part of a group who got the girl to eat dog feces. Most neighborhoods are divided into three kinds of children: those who torture the slow kid, those very few who defend her, and the great majority, who stand silent.
You've probably heard the defense in this case before, too. It's an old familiar one: She said yes. Given female sexuality and male hormones, suggested defense lawyer Michael Querques in his opening, what happened was inevitable -- and consensual. "Boys will be boys," he said.  This is insulting to young men of character, since it presumes that the ability to say no is the exclusive purview of women. And it doesn't explain why some left the basement. Perhaps they didn't believe testosterone was an easy excuse for exploitation.
It's an old story, why the slow girl did these things, and it has nothing to do with female sexuality. She wanted to be wanted. They promised her a date, she says, with one of the Jock Kings; one of them even put his arm around her. "Romantic," she called it. Then they set up the chairs in the basement "like a movie" and she let them do what they pleased with the broomstick and the baseball bat -- boys will be boys -- because she "didn't want to hurt their feelings."
She showed more humanity in that than any of them did. They behaved as though she were an inflatable doll, an inanimate object. Subtract the stereotypes about loose girls and uncontrollable male urges, and you come up with a clear picture of what went on in that basement: young men doing a cruel and reprehensible thing to a woman they chose specifically because they knew her limitations and tractability. This case isn't about boys being boys; it's about boys being predators. I guess it wasn't much of a leap, from the dog feces to the broomstick.
When she recalls in her reedy voice that she hung around afterward waiting for the dream date that never came, it makes no sense if you think of her as 21, much less as some hypersexed temptress. A 6-year-old trying to make friends no matter what the cost -- then you understand. The prosecution in the Glen Ridge case alleges a group sex assault of a teen-age girl. Watching her, listening to her, it seems like child abuse as well.
Next month students at the Laurence Taquin School for girls who are pregnant or already mothers will have another option for contraception -- the long-lasting Norplant. A consortium of hospitals, doctors, clinics and a foundation, supported by the Mayor of Baltimore, hopes to make Norplant available in all eight school clinics.
Norplant can protect against pregnancy for up to five years. Tiny tubes filled with progestin are implanted under the skin of a woman's upper arm; the hormone is then slowly released into the body. Should she change her mind about pregnancy, the tubes can be removed surgically.
A young woman using Norplant doesn't have to worry about getting pregnant; but she
must
continue to worry about sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS. So the consortium is also stressing that there's no safe sex without condoms.
While Baltimore's Health Department and school system will continue to stress abstinence as the safest route for youngsters, they're also being common-sensical. "We have to deal with the reality that in the Baltimore school system three-quarters or more of the students are sexually active," said Dr. Peter Beilenson, the city Health Commissioner.
That so many children are sexually active so soon is sad -- but not as sad as motherhood at 13 or dying of AIDS at 18. The Baltimore initiative is brave, and quite possibly a life saver.
Dr. Elders has now been asked by President-elect Bill Clinton to be the new Surgeon General of the United States. If her vigor and outspokenness in Arkansas are any guide, Mr. Clinton has made an excellent choice for the nation's top doctor. And as a black and a woman, she helps fulfill his pledge of a diverse administration.
For Dr. Elders, the term "public health" covers a wide spectrum of preventive medicine, dealing with everything from disease to violence to the impact of poverty.
A previous Surgeon General, Dr. C. Everett Koop, made brilliant use of his office by turning it into a bully pulpit from which to warn of the dangers of smoking, advocate sex education and speak intelligently and compassionately of AIDS. Dr. Elders, who shares Dr. Koop's candor and integrity, can be equally effective as a strong voice for the health needs of the public.
Even so, it is safe to say that an appetite that has embraced so much already will go on to embrace a whole lot more -- although it may be some time before vegetables get a hug. Yes, anyone devoted to a healthy, low-fat diet may despair at the President-elect's example. But it is, like Mr. Clinton himself, as American as apple pie.
This four-CD boxed set is a sometimes galvanizing document of the second of King Crimson's three lives to date. It presents live recordings of the band's 1973-74 lineup, featuring John Wetton on bass and vocals, Bill Bruford on percussion, Jamie Muir on violin and keyboards, and the Crimson major-domo Robert Fripp on guitar. The always adventurous band was often ridiculed for its (perceived) pomposity and pretension. But "The Great Deceiver" makes a compelling case for this permutation of the group, which charted areas few other rock musicians have the ability or imagination even to conceive of.
While their improvising skills make it clear that the players were conversant with jazz, much of this music is, if anything, anti-jazz; rather than swing, the rhythm section flexes, strains and jolts. Many of the guitar solos are built on simple but dramatic repetitions that eventually explode into fierce sonic pyrotechnics. During one of his stage asides, Fripp drolly alludes to the desire of the Crimson audience for a "cosmic" experience.
While the band's progressive-rock peers often aimed -- and failed -- to connect with the heavens, King Crimson traveled to more desolate regions; the group's most powerful work evokes supernovas and black holes. It's no coincidence that one of its showcase pieces was titled "Starless," two versions of which are included in the collection.
Several other songs are repeated on this lengthy set, but since the players were always working out new approaches to them, few of the duplicated pieces are redundant. The heft of the package might intimidate all but hard-core fans, which would be a shame, since "The Great Deceiver" sheds a new light on the band that could well convert some nonbelievers.
That tuning rejects the "equal tempered" spacing of notes of the piano and most Western instruments; equal temperament is actually a mistuning that makes relationships between notes slightly inexact for the sake of flexibility. Mr. Young (and others who have followed his example) uses "just intonation" in which tuning is precise. The result is that each note finds echoes in the overtones of another; there is more resonance and unexpected reinforcement between the notes. Mr. Young has specialized in exploring that unusual sonic space. With the creation of such works as "The Well-Tuned Piano," he became an almost archetypal figure of the musical counterculture, devoted to varieties of Indian music while acting as a pioneer of Western Minimalism.
In this case, "Young's Dorian Blues in G," as the evening's improvisation was called, was part of the Gruppen series of new-music groups at the Kitchen. The piece harked back to Mr. Young's early musical career when he played jazz and learned blues from listening to Charlie Parker. His own variety of blues dates back to before 1961: he made alterations in the regular 12-bar series of simple harmonies that can characterize the blues, and used a single modal scale without any chromatic alterations. When this approach was combined with just intonation (on the Korg synthesizer, played by Mr. Young, and on the electric guitars, played by Jon and Brad Catler), that shimmering cloud emerged, and the music took shape within it. Mr. Young may also have some historical justification for his approach to blues tuning: blues often involves microtonal bending of notes and does not attain its expressivity through modulation but through melodic twists; it is personal, vocal music and is not directly connected with ordinary instrumental intervals.
But despite the articulated rhythms of Jonathan Kane's drumming and the imaginative playing of Jon Catler, this was not the blues of personal narrative, revealing a private and pained world. At first it seemed almost bland, as if drained of blood; melodic tensions were muted by the consonant musical surroundings. Chords were sustained for long periods. There was incense burning during the performance, and magenta and pink lighting -- by Marian Zazeela, Mr. Youngs's wife -- that slowly changed with the music. (Additional performances are tonight, Thursday and Friday).
Finally, however, the music emerged as an intriguing combination of blues, 1960's happening, Eastern esthetic, rock and Minimalism. The point was not confession but contemplation, not a private world but an abstract one. The music left its impact in that ringing internal overtone and in the sense of immersion in a distinctive musical world.
In constructing his libretto, Berlioz concentrated on the sharp-edged romantic tension between Beatrice and Benedict. Mr. Graham recognized the durability of their snide flirtations by giving the production a generalized contemporary look. Mr. Conklin's set is an airy, white-and-blue grand foyer, an eternal bourgeois playground. The Sicilian setting is very much in the background; the principal players scamper about in snappy evening wear, dancing everything from the waltz to disco. Beatrice resembles Katharine Hepburn in one of her romantic comedies with perhaps a hint of Murphy Brown as well.
These post-Berlioz interpolations are not disruptive and in fact lend the production considerable charm. More problematic is Mr. Graham's attempt to fuse the musical numbers onto a full Shakespearean context (everything was in English). The intervening dialogues were aptly chosen, but the sung texts sometimes sounded awkward against the smooth lyrical lines. ("Il m'en souvient" becomes "Can I Forget.") And it asks a little too much of the singers to break into Shakespearean English every 10 or 15 minutes. But the cast on Wednesday night did reasonably well; any other company that can assemble a similarly versatile group of performers should take interest in this new performing edition, which was first done at the Opera Theater of St. Louis.
The crucial characters in this opera are the women; they receive the principal arias, some of the most effortless and ingratiating music of Berlioz's career. (Richard Strauss may have had this opera at the back of his mind when he was writing "Der Rosenkavalier" and its successors.) Lorraine Hunt, a soprano best known for her recordings of Handel, was a brilliant Beatrice, giving an emotionally intense rendition of "Il m'en souvient," and idiomatically snapping out the "Much Ado" dialogue. Jon Garrison, her counterpart as Benedict, sang handsomely but was not so convincing an actor; the opera came out perhaps too strongly weighted in Beatrice's direction.
The roles of Hero and Ursula, Beatrice's sly companions who maneuver her into a relationship with Benedict, are also vital: they have the opera's lyrical centerpiece, the "Nocturne" duet that closes the first act. Judith Lovat, as Hero, had some trouble in her grand coloratura satire but recovered to deliver a luminous "Nocturne" with Pamela Dillard. Steven Combs, James Bodge and Joseph McKee ably filled other roles. Robert Spano, the conductor, led the performance incisively, although the cramped space of the Emerson Majestic Theater was not favorable to the rich orchestration.
One of Mr. Graham's less desirable revisions involved Somarone, the incompetent and arrogant Kapellmeister whom Berlioz inserted as a wicked parody of his colleagues. (The particular target was Louis Jullien, fetishistic collector of batons.) The comic highlight of the opera is the performance of Somarone's "Grotesque Epithalamium," a turgidly fugal wedding hymn. With James Maddalena making broad comedy out of this figure and the chorus singing deliberately out of tune, Mr. Graham's version lacked subtlety, but I suppose it was more in tune with the Shakespearean paradigm. Beatrice and Benedict  Opera in two acts by Hector Berlioz, libretto by the composer after Shakespeare's "Much Ado About Nothing"; conductor, Robert Spano; staged by Colin Graham; sets and costumes by John Conklin; lighting by Christopher Akerlind; choreography by Marcus Schulkind; English translation by Geoffrey Dunn. Performed by the Boston Lyric Opera at the Emerson Majestic Theater, 219 Tremont Street, Boston. Hero . . . Judith Lovat Ursula . . . Pamela Dillard Beatrice . . . Lorraine Hunt Leonato . . . James Bodge A Messenger . . . Eddie Rutkowski Don Pedro . . . Joseph McKee Claudio . . . Steven Combs Benedict . . . Jon Garrison Somarone . . . James Maddalena WITH: Sean Breen, David Cangelosi, Jesse Martin and Deanna Peden
Among its virtues are David Hockney's simple, painted-drop sets and regal costumes. The sets, when considered alongside the extravagance of other recent Met productions, have an almost retro spirit. Color, both subtle and garish, is plentiful. And the quick, efficient scene changes, combined with Gil Wechsler's lighting, enhance the magical atmosphere.
The company has done itself credit with the season's first cast. Dawn Upshaw's Pamina was a joy for both musicality and dramatic sensitivity. Vocally, she reminded a listener that a soprano who knows how to use her resources need not have an enormous instrument to fill the Met. She sang Pamina's music with an uncommon suppleness and purity of tone, and her second-act lament, "Ach, ich fuhl's," was one of the evening's most touching moments.
One also had to admire the breadth of Ms. Upshaw's portrayal. Her Pamina moved believably from disconsolation to hope, from a potentially tragic figure to a fulfilled one, and in the finale, from a spirited girlishness to settled maturity.
Frank Lopardo's Tamino, if not as stunning as Ms. Upshaw's Pamina, was in nearly the same league. His voice is smooth and powerful, and once he got over the slight woodenness that constrained him in the first scene, he endowed Tamino's music with a touch of heroic steel. He also cuts a good figure in this kind of role.
There were some rough edges in Gottfried Hornik's accounts of Papageno's arias, but of course, vocal polish, though always welcome, is not the point of this rustic role. What Mr. Hornik had going for him was a natural comic sense that made his bits of stage business seem improvisatory.
Sally Wolf made her Met debut as the Queen on Saturday. Her performance was a mixed success. There were fleeting weaknesses in the lower part of her range, though she disguised them ably by producing a creamy tone that called attention to itself. That created a few problems in the quickly running passage work, which Ms. Wolf tended to glide through a little indistinctly. Her box score for pyrotechnics was unusually good: although she was just a hair shy of the top F in "O zitt're nicht," she hit all of them firmly in "Die Holle Rache." More crucially, she conveyed something of the Queen's anger and pain.
Jan-Hendrik Rootering was a philosophical but vocally slightly unsteady Sarastro. Korliss Uecker sang sweetly and amusingly as Papagena, and Anthony Laciura, one of the house's best character actors, was a perfectly villainous Monostatos.
The orchestra produced a transparently Mozartean sound for Donald Runnicles, who led a comfortably paced, nicely balanced performance.
Mr. Masur led a stately account of the Bach, but the performance had its share of unfortunate moments. Throughout the suite, the sound of the ensemble was gauzy and indistinct, and the brass playing was sour and accident-prone.
To be charitable, it might have been that the players needed a few moments to get accustomed to the church's acoustics. But the Bach also sounded less thoroughly rehearsed than the Ellington and the Mendelssohn, which were not similarly plagued.
Ellington began "Les Trois Rois Noirs" as a ballet score for Dance Theater of Harlem in 1973. He apparently sketched out all three movements, but left the work incomplete at his death in 1974. Mercer Ellington, his son, finished the suite, and Luther Henderson gave it an attractive, richly textured orchestration.
Each of its three movements -- King of the Magi, King Solomon and Martin Luther King -- is set in a distinct language, but with a split focus that presents the music in both a straightforward symphonic style and in a series of jazz variations. The King of the Magi is presented through a mild exoticism. King Solomon's portrait is painted in lush, soft-focus Debussian harmonies. And the Martin Luther King movement, the suite's most attractive, is built on a gracefully lilting melody.
Mr. Masur conducted a solid, balanced performance, and the Mannes Orchestra's individual sections acquitted themselves admirably. One did not have the sense that Mr. Masur was out of his element, even in the full-tilt jazz writing in the finale.
He was most at home, though, in the Mendelssohn, whose music has long been a specialty of his. Apart from a few odd balances in the opening bars, the young players responded attentively to Mr. Masur's careful shaping. The wind choir that announced the finale's chorale theme could not have been more unified, and the string playing glowed with a delightful lyricism.
Don Grolnick's first set on Tuesday night posed some problems. Mr. Grolnick, an aggressively mundane pianist from Los Angeles, had brought together two of the best tenor saxophonists in New York -- Josh Redman and Joe Lovano -- and constructed a rhythm section around them that didn't swing, as if it had been nailed securely to the floor. Mr. Grolnick's idea was halfway there: when the two saxophonists improvised, either alone or together, winding their lines around each other, valiantly fighting the undertow, the music filled up with the glow of creativity and excitement. When they stopped, it fell apart.
The lowest point of the set was a completely misguided version of Thelonious Monk's "Ugly Beauty," taken at half the tempo Monk favored; it's hard to believe that such a graceful melody could possibly be sacrificed to ineptitude, but it was. Even the saxophonists couldn't redeem it, and as if to make up for that, Mr. Grolnick and the rhythm section overplayed wildly.
The best parts of the set were when the group swung conventionally. Once the compositions were out of the way and the saxophonists could solo freely, the music took off. Mr. Redman, 23, is rapidly adding effects to his arsenal of ideas, and with a sure swing he managed to blend the classical clarity of be-bop with tonal blurs and shrieks of the Expressionist avant-garde. Mr. Lovano is a master of the asymmetrical, and his phrases suddenly stopped and picked up again. A colorist as well, he would recast his own ideas, turning them over and over, as if to reflect all sorts of meaning from a single phrase.
Bach's Partita (BWV 1013) and the second of Couperin's "Concerts Royaux" suffered from stop-and-go phrasing. C. P. E. Bach's Sonata in E minor was more efficiently paced. The accompanists were Michael Willens, playing viola da gamba, and Jocelyn Stewart at the harpsichord.
After intermission, Mr. Hulbert hit full stride, delivering the world premiere of Michael Biondi's moody Sonata for Flute Alone. Harvey Sollberger's "Sunflowers," for flute and vibraphone, had the performer trading among flute, alto flute and piccolo, accompanied by Brian Willson on vibraphone; the opening section shared the ethereally claustrophobic atmosphere of Morton Feldman's later period, but restless, spectacular gestures soon followed. The Copland Duo, with Carolyn Guzski at the piano, is alternately serene and kinetic; pulling it together with assurance, Mr. Hulbert earned his ovation.
Count di Luna's soldiers have a burnished, silvery presence; Manrico's forces are in vague pastels. As they confront each other in the shadows, the famous image of Matthew Arnold's "ignorant armies" leaps out at the audience, albeit transferred to 15th-century Aragon. This "Trovatore" emphasizes the vastness of the Met's stage. There are some virtues to the idea, especially in the interesting geometric spacings Mr. Melano makes for his choruses.
Yet in the trio "Qual voce" and the duet between Azucena and Manrico, "Perigliarti ancor languente" -- and these are only two examples -- individuals shrivel to miniature size. "Il Trovatore" is a big opera in many ways, but it also relies on a certain claustrophobia, a mingling of the various body heats necessary to fuel its violence.
Nello Santi's splendid conducting, fierce and precise, had all this to overcome but ended up being admired mostly for itself, less as an engine of stage drama. Indeed, the search for beauty in a disembodied state and the search for an opera's violent emotions were pursued as independent inquiries on Monday night. In Leonora's opening sequence, Deborah Voigt's gorgeous soprano (she substituted for an ailing Aprile Millo) reached out and settled comfortably in every corner of this big hall.
Against it, Jane Shaulis's Inez sounded raw, forward and not always quite in tune. Yet it was Ms. Shaulis who in that opening moment sounded like an organic part of "Il Trovatore" and Ms. Voigt an observer. The latter is a splendid singer and a musician of taste. Her relish for the beautiful sound is obvious. Admiration for one's own beauty is a valid emotion and at its most intense becomes a workable metaphor for other feelings as well. But for most of the evening Ms. Voigt seemed a scrupulous imitator of passion rather than innerly passionate herself.
There were some welcome hot spots scattered in this cool sea. Vladimir Chernov was one, a Count di Luna who manages Verdi's rough assertions with no compromise of technique and control. As Manrico, Lando Bartolini's tenor was overmatched by its surroundings. The voice is not particularly unhealthy but is of such limited constitution that almost every moment was strain, sweat and insecurity of pitch. Mr. Bartolini's diminutive figure in passionate pursuit of Ms. Voigt's more formidable one strained suspension of disbelief to near breaking point. But as they say, love will find a way.
Dolora Zajick created a center of coherence all by herself on Monday. As Azucena, her mezzo-soprano growled and rasped with appropriate heat, and yet there was a poise that rescued the role from mere melodrama. The voice is big and secure, and it never failed her audience.
Elsewhere Jeffrey Wells made nice work of Ferrando's introductory tale-telling. The Met's chorus and orchestra performed with great delicacy. Franca Squarciapino's costumes and armor were a soft, tasteful presence against the perpetual darkness. Gil Wechsler's lighting translated Mr. Melano's ideas diligently.
This Dr. John graced the Blue Note's stage on Tuesday night. In black, with only a few sequins recalling his wilder days, he sat at the piano with characteristic, Buddha-like composure and led his six-piece band through a smooth set of Louisiana rhythm-and-blues. The band opened with the Crescent City perennial "Iko Iko," giving it a slick uptown spin. Dr. John uses his skill at fusing various roots traditions with rock to create a kind of ever-shifting medley, with bits of standards popping up within other tunes and giving way to other familiar melodies.
From the stage, Dr. John called his style of rewriting the classics "decomposition," but these days, as the precision of the music made clear, he's leaving a very neat corpse. Individual band members proved their punch when given the chance to solo, an opportunity most often granted the baritone saxophonist, Ronnie Cuber. Mostly, though, the group concentrated on maintaining a groove as smooth, yet full of hidden turns, as a Southern river in the summertime.
Dr. John's deft touch on the keyboard and his mint julep croon (which was a bit cracklier than usual) gave the slower ballads the feel of parlor music in a house of ill repute. The set rolled to a close with a version of "Big Chief," following the original "Goin' Back to New Orleans," which threw a surprising dash of salsa into the musical brew. Then Dr. John departed, having cast a spell that was as complex, if less spectacular, as his earlier incantations.
Another unusual recital of vocal and instrumental chamber music will take place next Sunday at 4 P.M., this one a celebration of Black History Month at Concordia College in Bronxville. The concert is the first of several designed to trace the cultural heritage of the American chamber music repertory. Oddly, the program includes Ravel's "Chansons Madecasses" but otherwise stays within the parameters of music by black Americans like Hale Smith, Undine Smith Moore, George Walker and Valerie Capers. The number to call for reservations is 337-9300, extension 2431.
Last autumn, two fine chamber ensembles appeared for the first time at the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase: the Walden Horn Trio, making its Westchester debut, and the Greenleaf Chamber Players -- organized as a resident group of the center itself -- playing its first concert anywhere. Both groups will return to the center next weekend. The Walden Trio's program includes works by Schumann and Schubert next Saturday at 8 P.M.  The composers on the Greenleaf program on Sunday at 3 P.M. include Schumann, Bach, Britten and Brahms. Both concerts will be given in Theater C. More information about either event can be obtained by calling the box office at 251-6200.
Wave Hill in Riverdale is presenting an all-Brahms program next Sunday at 3 P.M. The Banat-Kagan Chamber Players will perform the Trio in C and the G minor Piano Quartet. Admission to the grounds is free in February, but to reserve concert tickets, the number to call is (718) 549-3200.
A free recital will take place at the Briarcliff Congregational Church next Sunday at 4 P.M. Three Russian-born artists will perform: the husband-wife team of Victor Heifets and Anna Rabinova, two violinists who emigrated only last July, and the pianist Dmitri Rachmanov, whose American career dates back over a decade. Included on the program are violin duets by Vivaldi and Mozart and sonatas for violin and piano by Beethoven and John Corigliano. The number to call for more information is 941-4368.
The yearly benefit program for the Elmendorf Opportunity Center in Bronxville will also take place next Sunday at 4 P.M. The concert, at the Reformed Church of Bronxville, features the brilliant young French virtuoso Marie-Pierre Langlamet, associate principal harpist of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra. She will be playing works by Bach, Debussy, Mozart and Scarlatti along with two novelties -- Sergiv Natra's "Music for Harp and Violin" (with Jean-Claude Velin) and, in its world premiere, "Two Pieces for Harp" by Nathan Currier. More information can be obtained by calling 337-6776.
For the last two years, the Westchester chapter of the American Guild of Organists has presented the countywide Anthem Festival. During this event more than 100 singers from about a dozen church choirs come together to rehearse and perform anthems -- religious choral works -- representing a diversity of musical traditions and styles. The 1993 festival is set for Saturday at the Rye Presbyterian Church. The participants are studying the pieces at daytime workshops under the direction of James Simms, then presenting them in a public concert that evening at 7 o'clock. There is no stated admission charge, but a $5 donation is suggested. More information can be obtained by calling the church's music director, Robert Moncrief, at 967-0842.
The organist Richard Heschke plays works by Buxtehude at Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains on Wednesday at 12:35 P.M. In addition, he will perform compositions by two 16th-century Alsatian organist-composers: Bernhard Schmid and his son, also called Bernhard. A contribution of $5 is suggested; the number to call for more information is 949-0384.
A number of folk concerts are being offered this week.
Jacqueline Sharp, co-writer of the Kingston Trio hit "The M.T.A. Song," will sing ballads and art songs in an unusual program at Christ's Episcopal Church in Rye. The concert begins today at 5 P.M. She will accompany herself on guitar during the ballads and will be assisted in the art songs by the pianist Christopher Lewis. The number to call for more information is 967-1749.
Stu Kabak and the duo of Monty Delaney and Bob Novikoff initiate folk music at the Southsound Coffeehouse on Saturday at 8 P.M. The coffeehouse is on the campus of Salesian High School in New Rochelle. More information can be obtained by calling 235-5813.
A two-hour "Performing the Blues" workshop for singers and pianists is being given by the singer Sandi Blair and the pianist Bruno Casolari next Saturday at 11 A.M. The two artists will be joined by the double-bass player David Jacobs for an 8 P.M. concert at the Rye Arts Center.  The program will trace the evolution of the blues from early black work songs to contemporary classics. The number to call for more details is 967-0700
The singer Anne Hills, perhaps best known for her work with the folk singer Tom Paxton but who is a talented soloist as well, will be performing next Saturday at 8 P.M. at the South Salem Library. Her repertory includes an assortment of traditional and contemporary songs. More information can be obtained by calling 763- 3132.
MUSIC
My advice, which I am confident Ms. Lippi will not take, is to turn her back on management and career and find a teacher who cares more about music than about how to play the violin. Such a teacher might persuade her that ardor can also be elegant and restrained and that Faure might prefer it that way. She might discover that there is more to style than enthusiasm and playing in tune, that every composer poses important and complex questions about scale and tone of voice -- in short, that music is not a playground for the highly gifted.
John Novacek was the fluent, responsive and, for better or worse, compatible pianist.
Both these musicians, though still in their 20's, have established solid reputations in recent seasons. Ms. Frank made a stunning recital debut in 1990, but she was well known in musical circles before then, having been singled out as one of the more promising violinists at Marlboro, the Vermont summer festival that has become almost a farm team for the concert world.
Mr. Solzhenitsyn is also a Marlboro regular, and he is still studying at the Curtis Institute, Ms. Frank's alma mater. Besides their academic pedigrees, both musicians also have famous parents: Ms. Frank's parents are the pianists Claude Frank and Lilian Kallir and Mr. Solzhenitsyn's father is Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn.
Ms. Frank and Mr. Solzhenitsyn created their brightest sparks in Prokofiev's Sonata in F minor (Op. 80), a passionate work in which currents of nobility and bitterness, stretches of brashness and moments of otherworldly beauty run through one another but never entirely mix. Some of the most evocative moments in their performance were those in which Ms. Frank and Mr. Solzhenitsyn avoided the temptation toward stark contrasts, instead drawing gradually on Prokofiev's diverse elements. The effect was the shock of recognition one feels when circumstances have changed too subtly to be noticed, but are suddenly dire.
In the program's other major work, the Strauss Sonata in E flat (Op. 18), the passions are of the more straightforwardly steamy variety. Ms. Frank and Mr. Solzhenitsyn understated them at the start, but soon worked up to a suitably fiery, lush account, full of sweetly phrased but hard-driven violin lines set over a rich, equally lyrical piano texture.
The program also included a fluid, velvety account of Dvorak's "Four Romantic Pieces" (Op. 75), in which sentimentality was hinted at but was not allowed to dominate; and a direct, warm-toned reading of Webern's "Four Pieces" (Op. 7).
Mr. Hagegard, the Swedish baritone, so finely calculates his technical reserves that he can both whisper and shout, confident that each delivery will have its force. The whispers rasp, becoming metaphors for private communication and vulnerability. At fortissimo, Mr. Hagegard's voice gleams with health.
He has found the middle ground between the recitalist as narrator and as actor. The male-female responses in Strauss's "Fur Funfzehn Pfennige" are transmitted by facial expression and sound. Only in Wolf's "Abschied," an encore, did the singer venture farther: pointing vigorously to the piano as Mr. Jones depicted a tumble down the stairs.
There were three Grieg songs at the beginning: "Fra Monte Pincio," wonderfully various in Mr. Hagegard's hands; "Jeg Elsker Dig," in all its sudden and irresistible sweetness; and the larger, thicker and in the end less compelling cantata "Den Bergtekne."
Berg's "Seven Early Songs" negotiated between the last century and ours. Emerging from the whole-tone figures of "Nacht," subtle key changes swirl around a tonal center. In the songs that follow, Mahler's expansions of folk song are commented on. Everywhere there is both reverence and dissatisfaction with a composer's immediate past.
Mr. Hagegard also sang three songs by Brahms and introduced four by Stephen Paulus, grouped under the title "Bittersuite" and set to Ogden Nash poems. This is Nash in his somber mood, yet I think neither composer nor performer have really noticed the light, springy and strangely paradoxical step with which the approach of death is being noted. Mr. Hagegard's diction offered a stifling embrace. The music is either stringent and bitter or else unwisely inflated to operatic size.
Mr. Jones played excerpts from "La Muse Menagere," Milhaud's pianistic tribute to (his wife's) housework. From the tiny valse triste to the busy perpetuum mobile, the music is as satisfying and uneventful as the chores they depict. Mr. Jones performed with humor, tenderness and command, here and everywhere else during this splendid afternoon.
Mr. Saltzman, who led a concert performance of "Hercules" with the Sine Nomine Singers in 1984, must have anticipated the difficulties posed by the work, which the Handel biographer Paul Henry Lang called "the crowning glory of Baroque music drama." Mr. Barrett's production, which ran for three performances over the weekend with a rotating student cast, was in fact little more than an elaborate semi-staging, with none of the lavish conceits of Baroque opera. The set consisted of a raised platform with a thronelike chair and steps leading up to it. The chorus sang from the pit, with the stage blacked out or frozen in tableau. Costumed characters sang arias alone onstage or before pantomimed scenes.
All of which left the focus squarely on the musical performance, and on Friday it was sadly inadequate. Only one singer -- Megan Dey, as Hercules's wife, Dejanira -- had a voice and technique of sufficient stature to take hold of a role and make something of it. Fortunately, Dejanira is the opera's real protagonist, a sort of female Othello, as the Handel scholar Winton Dean has noted. Ms. Dey brought a strong, characterful soprano to the part, embellishing her lines with ease and agility. She sagged a bit midway through the performance, which even with extensive cuts lasted more than three hours, but rose nobly to her climactic mad scene.
And she accomplished this amid horribly dispiriting circumstances, with lesser efforts all around and with hapless backing from a chronically mistuned string section. (Mr. Saltzman, a choral specialist, drew a more respectable effort from a chorus of no great refinement.)
To make matters worse -- indeed, truly bizarre -- all these exertions by some 55 performers took place in an acoustically problematic 2,500-seat hall before an audience of about 35 souls at the start, 25 at the end. This misguided venture was a brutal introduction to the hard realities of show business for well-meaning young performers, and painful to observe.
For the third version, in English, the accompaniment switched to sultry jazz-blues. Miss Lemper lighted a cigarette, rolled around on the piano and became nearly hysterical, ending the song in piercing bluesy shrieks.
Like almost everything else in the concert, Miss Lemper's interpretation of a European warhorse by multiple personalities was a calculated tour de force. The singer, who physically resembles the young Dietrich, radiated charisma. Wearing a plain black slip dress, she moved about the stage with a dancer's stealthy grace, sometimes crouching with head in hands, at others wildly flinging her arms.
The material in her program -- mostly songs identified with Dietrich, Edith Piaf, Lotte Lenya and Yves Montand -- was artfully strung together with fragments of poetry and moody instrumental interludes conducted by her talented musical director, Bruno Fontaine.
Miss Lemper has already established herself as a respected interpreter of the Brecht-Weill catalogue. And on Monday she presented herself as nothing less than the heir apparent to Dietrich and Piaf and the whole European music-hall tradition they represent. Miss Lemper's voice, though still marred by a whining nasality when belting in her upper register, has gained in strength and flexibility since she first appeared in New York several years ago.
If the concert was a bravura exercise in stylized interpretation, its dramatized passions often felt overly rehearsed. At moments, however, the singer transcended her own calculations. A ferocious rendition of Henri Alexandre Conet and Norbert Glanzberg's ballad "Padam" stirred the audience to spontaneous cheers.
Talking with the audience after performing her work in progress, "Mu Lan Pi," on Monday night, the cellist Diedre Murray said that the circular patterns running through her latest composition were meant to evoke "the part of the universe where things are familiar, but not." Ms. Murray views this esthetic and philosophical locale as the proper stopping place for the story that shapes this piece, a tale of travel drawn from Ivan Van Sertima's book "They Came Before Columbus."
In his work, Mr. Sertima compiled various legends of exploration from Asian, Middle Eastern and African cultures, asserting that these adventurers arrived in the New World long before the Europeans claimed it. Ms. Murray has set one of Mr. Sertima's stories to a jazz score that draws from classical and avant-garde music. The resulting collage of sounds and styles invokes the mythical story, which recalls Western culture's dominant history of conquest, and yet in its African nature remains totally distinct.
For this performance, Ms. Murray enlisted the talents of her longtime collaborator, the eminent bassist Fred Hopkins; the multi-instrumentalist Richard Harper, on piano; the percussionist Eli Fountain, and the drummer Newman Taylor Baker.  Each of these players is a master of expressionistic nuance, able to go from noisy extremes to subtle melodicism. The jazz score the players followed allowed each to shine, with Mr. Hopkins and Ms. Murray the dominant voices.
The tragedy of Abubakari, a 13th-century king of Mali who vanished while seeking new worlds, particularly suited the regal tones of Ms. Murray's cello; the artist's classical training, combined with a great adventurousness, made for playing that seemed to transcend the centuries. A section led by Mr. Harper and Mr. Hopkins, entitled "Dissolved Bird," was also striking. Muted yet alluring, this music floated somewhere between Debussy's piano music and a Fulani chant, in a moving dream of unity.
On stage, Moby himself was nearly as hyperactive as the dancers on the floor. He delivered the occasional lyric: a shouted "Go!" or, in "Electricity," a rap that praises largely wordless techno music for providing "no questions, no answers." He jumped around the stage, poked at two keyboard setups, leapt up on a table and held out his arms in a crucifixion pose. Between songs, he named song titles and did unusual things for a techno performer. He told listeners they could have a good time without drugs and dedicated a song to Jesus Christ. But with strobe lights flickering and spotlights sweeping as the music pumped with clout and clarity, he was at once master and servant of an unstoppable electronic engine.
The Prodigy, from England, showed how techno is already splintering. As Americans borrow from hip-hop, British techno looks to Jamaican dance-hall rapping; Liam Howlett, the Prodigy's keyboardist and composer, works with a dance hall-style rapper, Keity, and two male dancers. The music is more changeable than its American cousin, shifting texture every 30 seconds. But on stage, the Britons talk too much. Instead of letting dancers appreciate the Prodigy's cleverness with melodic hooks and speed shifts that felt like a zipper opening up the rib cage, Keity kept up exhortations -- "Wind it up" -- that sounded like badgering.
Cybersonik, a pair of keyboardists from Detroit, was less polished, using flat video-game sounds and cold, often unsyncopated drum-machine rhythms. As momentum gathered, it became clear that the music was deliberately primitivist, stripping away fancy rhythms and elaborate sound-shaping to get to a raw, punky version of techno.
Correction:  February 26, 1993, Friday
A picture caption last Saturday with a rock review about techno performers misidentified the artist shown. He was Keity of the English group Prodigy.
Although he can deliver ballads with the best of them, Mr. Bloom emphasizes rhythm over melody, building a complex sonic structure around a song's core. Mr. Bloom's airy guitar runs wove an atmospheric web around "A Man Alive and Breathing," which in other hands may have constituted a simple confession; the song became more like a miniature movie soundtrack. A flamenco strum brought "Not Without You" into the realm of percussive dance music. "Exploring the Blue," with its eerie imagery of self-transformation and expansive chorus, resembled the experiments of the Canadian composer Jane Siberry.
At times, Mr. Bloom failed to attain his grandiose ambitions, despite his tremendous artistry. A cover version of Prince's "When Doves Cry" only stimulated longing for the Minneapolis music wizard's more fleshed-out version, and "The Fertile Rock," a bit of new-age environmentalism, came off as overblown. But overall, Mr. Bloom's music gave a thrilling sense of how folk music can adapt to changing times. His use of hip-hop was especially inspired; the evening's standout was a rapid-fire version of L. L. Cool J.'s "I Need Love" that lived up to the challenge of the original. May more strummers and hummers pick up the gauntlet this feisty artist has thrown down.
Except for Cole Porter, no Broadway lyricist wrote about sex with the heated enthusiasm of Carolyn Leigh, whose work is celebrated in "Young at Heart," Sara Zahn's superb new cabaret show. Leigh, who died in 1983 at 57, collaborated with Cy Coleman on slinky standards like "You Fascinate Me So," "Witchcraft" and "The Best Is Yet to Come." Parading strung-together double-entendres, these songs have the allure of elegant verbal stripteases.
Unlike most performers who sing them, Ms. Zahn refused to underline their salaciousness at Friday's show. In a warm, strong voice that had a slightly reedy edge, she treated them as good-humored mash notes exchanged by lovers who relish sophisticated word games but are not panting to take off their clothes.
The carefully constructed show, which plays Friday evenings at 8:30, also reveals aspects of Leigh's talent that go beyond erotic banter. "Six O'Clock News" and "Night Life in Santa Rosa," two collaborations with Marvin Hamlisch for the score of "Smile," which Leigh didn't live to complete (Mr. Hamlisch rewrote the score with Howard Ashman) evoke show-business dreams and frustrations with a biting pungency.
"Sooner or Later," written with Lee Pockriss for an unproduced musical, "Gatsby," is the potentially show-stopping monologue of a determined woman who believes that her continually philandering husband will always come back to her. Best of all is "Killing Time," a very late Leigh song written with Jule Styne. This reflection of an abandoned woman fighting against despair has the soul-searching depth of a Joni Mitchell ballad.
Accompanied on piano by Christopher Denny, Ms. Zahn sang everything with a clarity, assurance and measured passion that never got in the way of the material. Her show is a model act of its kind.
With its paired guitars and tubas, Very Very Circus is kin to Ornette Coleman's Prime Time; it can sound like two independent groups at once, playing simultaneous, contrasting tunes, at once cheerful and melancholy. Mr. Threadgill's music always has a sense of humor; he does, after all, use tubas instead of basses. And his instrumental combinations are full of allusions, touching on jazz, funk, brass bands and, in the jaunty "Try Some Ammonia," something like Caribbean gospel with slippery key changes. His own saxophone, used as just one orchestral touch, is wry and jovial, but can turn bluesy in an instant.
The group's early set featured material from Mr. Threadgill's new album, "Too Much Sugar for a Dime" (Axiom/Island). The skewed oom-pah tubas of "Little Pocket-Sized Demons," supported an alto saxophone melody hinting at operetta, then be-bop; "Paper Toilet" jumped between stately paired tubas and jabbing saxophone lines. "Better Wrapped/Better Unrapped" interspersed triple-time drumming and singing, apparently from a Venezuelan ritual, with a woozy, multi-layered theme. And "In Touch" juxtaposed a sustained song (with wide-eyed lyrics: "Where does yesterday go?") with an urgent riff and the percolating sound of Simon Shaheen's oud. In Mr. Threadgill's hands, such unexpected, volatile combinations suggest the possibility of dancing right through a bewildering world.
Various composers have written works for two violins, far fewer for two cellos. Odd, since a cello duo makes a rich, versatile sound. Richard Locker and Frederick Zlotkin assembled their program on Sunday afternoon largely from arrangements: Jean Barriere's Cello Sonata in G, Rossini's "Duetto" (originally for cello and bass), Haydn's Duet in D (originally for two barytons) and the not-really-by-Albinoni Albinoni "Adagio," given a lovely arrangement by Torrie Zito, a contemporary composer. Once their instruments and hands warmed up, Mr. Locker and Mr. Zlotkin made a strong argument for these two-cello versions.
The duo also played three works that needed no recalibration: Kummer's Duet in G Minor and Mr. Zito's "Montauk Suite" and "Fantasia." The last two, receiving their world premieres, were highly accessible but by no means drab: the suite's Scherzo scurried along in an elegant dancelike motion, propelled by the interlocking sonorities of a ghostly middle range.
Abbey Simon has always had special fondness for the fierier side of the keyboard repertory, and he seems disinclined to allow such considerations as age -- he is 71 -- to dictate an easier course. On Wednesday evening, he played an uncompromising program that included Schumann's "Kreisleriana" (Op. 16), the Brahms "Paganini" Variations, Ravel's "Gaspard de la Nuit" and Prokofiev's virtuosic Toccata (Op. 11).
Mr. Simon was at his most fluid and persuasive in Ravel's picturesque trilogy. His rendering of "Ondine" was a three-dimensional account of the mythical water sprite and her world, and the closing "Scarbo" was electrifying and properly magical. Between them, Mr. Simon's atmospheric reading of "Le Gibet" very clearly portrayed the swinging hanged man and the tolling church bell.
Elsewhere there were a few chinks in Mr. Simon's technical armor. In the Schumann and Brahms works, there were slight rhythmic hesitations and an occasional muddying of textures; yet there were also stretches of poetry and insight. And Mr. Simon's account of the Prokofiev was a model of bravura playing.

The notes to the new "Don Quixote," written by Steven Isserlis, set the tone: an elaborate retelling of the Cervantes story, with 62 separate plot twists matched to index tracks on the CD. Twentieth-century musical ideals have rejected program music, the kind of extravagant pictorialism that brought Richard Strauss early fame. Mr. Isserlis and the Minnesota Orchestra, led by Edo de Waart, have gone back to the core of "Don Quixote," immersing themselves in its narrative virtuosity.
The cellist produces a smooth and spontaneous sound: his statement of the Don Quixote theme is free of the frantic scrubbing Strauss's difficult figuration usually draws. His solos throughout are richly characterized. Variation No. 7, the episode of the windmills, weaves the various orchestral special effects into a seamless stretch of fantasy.
But in certain passages Mr. de Waart blunts the score's more brutal edges. The frenzied dissonant episode at the end of the introduction, symbolic of Don Quixote's madness, falls short of the ferocity heard in Rudolf Kempe's remarkable EMI recording with the Dresden Staatskapelle Orchestra. Another disappointment is the frightening scene of Quixote's collapse (Variation No. 10), with downward chromatic woodwind scales over flailing timpani strokes. When a brilliant cellist takes center stage in this work, the orchestral dimension is sometimes diminished.
Virgin's disk generously includes two other tone poems. "Don Juan" is rich and subtle, with the orchestra outplaying its reputation. But "Till Eulenspiegel" needs to be more malicious, more free-spirited. On the whole, this handsomely produced recording presents a fresh approach to much-heard music, but neglects the composer's devilish side.
What Mr. McBride plays is extraordinary. He uses a handful of tones, wrapping a note with a light metallic clink to cut through the welling of the cymbals, or producing a dull sheen that gives his lines the weighty sound of an ax cutting into damp wood. He swings with a scary drive: a tune might open in a lilting 2/4 time, then move into 4/4 for the improvisations, allowing Mr. McBride to generate what seems like an unstoppable forward motion. The notes, perfectly placed, have a geometry to them that gives his walking bass lines the inexorability of an avalanche.
Mr. McKinney, 19, and Mr. Penn, 25, kept up. The band, regularly changing dynamics, made each tune -- usually standards -- feel like an expedition. Mr. McKinney was in a bit of a rush, charging ahead with chordal passages and exploratory hammered notes, giving an urgency to the show and making the perfect balance for Mr. McBride's driving restraint.
As for Debussy's concern about finding audiences, in this case he need not have worried. All seven supertitled performances here have been sold out (the final two are on Wednesday and Thursday), and on Saturday night, the early exit by the audience, a common feature of this haunting and languid opera, did not take place. Moreover, "Pelleas" has suddenly become one of the most fashionable of operas. Chicago offered a new production this season; the Welsh National Opera presented one last year; Peter Brook created a version in Paris; Cologne is making plans as well, and the Metropolitan Opera has a new production scheduled for the 1994-95 season. Perhaps some of the fascination comes from Debussy's challenge to the tradition; the work also seems suited to current ambitions to make opera a director's art.
Here, admittedly, the result is somewhat odd. The story of Melisande -- the lost woman found in the forest by Golaud, who then marries her -- remains intact; Pelleas, Golaud's half-brother, falls in love with her (and her long hair) with unfortunate consequences. But the characters, dressed here in clothing styles from Debussy's own time, move about in a glossy black universe among those glassy sculptures, which seem almost organic, like giant orchids, internal organs and sea anemones. The viewing mind is torn between literalness and abstraction.
To a certain extent, the music inspires a similar reaction, creating a sense of abstract space and suspended time while its melodic lines are simple and functional. Debussy instructed the first-night cast to forget they were singing, so clearly did he want the rising and falling pitches to imitate the intonations of ordinary speech.
Gerard Schwarz, who aside from his New York musical activities is music director of the Seattle Symphony and is heard annually conducting at the Seattle Opera, treated the score with an American-style directness and just enough Impressionist delicacy. Sometimes Mr. Schwarz leaned too heavily on individual phrases, but he gave the orchestral scenic preludes a fervent energy, making them the axes of the work, and supplied cultivated support to the composer's vocal rhetoric (it would be interesting to hear him in New York in opera repertory).
Sheri Greenawald, a soprano who has had great success as a Seattle regular, was the most compelling member of the cast, as Melisande. She did not possess the liquid elegance to make the role seem otherworldly, but her voice bloomed as the opera progressed and was always used with an idiomatic sense of style; the voice embodied a character.
Kenneth Cox's Arkel, though occasionally stolid, became a tender foil to the drama of jealousy and death. When it finally came time for Michael Devlin to show passion as Golaud, he used his bass-baritone with authority; it seemed to grow in size. Disappointing as Pelleas was Malcolm Walker, who sang in a continuing state of emotional resignation. Sheila Nadler was an ardent Genevieve.
Strangely, the effectiveness of the performance made the production seem both too weird and not weird enough. Too weird, because some of the set designs -- like the globule in the castle room where Golaud jealously assaults Melisande -- had an almost kitschy effect, as if some fancy interior decorator had been called in to redo a country kitchen. Not weird enough because when the designs were striking, the stage action seemed too crudely literal. Pelleas wrapping himself in Melisande's hair is ill suited to a stage where huge curled orange acrylic ribbons cover the floor.
Neil Peter Jampolis, who was responsible for the direction, lighting and costumes, almost seemed to work against the imagery of the sets. It was also jarring to see Golaud's child, Yniold (sung by Nikolas Sean-Paul Nackley), appearing here tall enough to be adolescent when the dialogue and music require a young innocent, barely over the age of 8; a powerfully sung scene was thus undercut.
With Speight Jenkins as general director, the Seattle Opera has earned a reputation for using American singers and directors in thoughtful and musically polished productions. This "Pelleas," for all my qualifications, showed the company's capabilities. Mr. Chihuly's designs suggest ways in which "Pelleas" might be taken beyond its literal text, in the cloistered dream world of the French Symbolists, a world suffused with mystery and inconsistency. That may be why the opera is now so much in fashion: it is a region in which contemporary visions of sexual desire can feel at home. Pelleas et Melisande  Opera in five acts by Claude Debussy; libretto by Maurice Maeterlinck after his play of the same title; conductor, Gerard Schwarz; direction, lighting and costumes by Neil Peter Jampolis; sets by Dale Chihuly. Performed by the Seattle Opera in Seattle, Wash. Pelleas . . . Malcolm Walker Melisande . . . Sheri Greenawald Golaud . . . Michael Devlin Genevieve . . . Sheila Nadler Arkel . . . Kenneth Cox Yniold . . . Nikolas Sean-Paul Nackley A Physician . . . Archie Drake A Shepherd . . . Brian Box
Mr. Brieff, incidentally, won't relinquish the baton until he conducts a pair of children's concerts a week from Tuesday, at 9:30 A.M. in Naugatuck High School, and at 11 A.M. in Kennedy School in Waterbury. Next season, Ms. Gilbert said, the orchestra will begin its search for a new music director with a parade of guest conductors. For reservations to the Saturday farewell or other information about the symphony, call 574-4283.
The story goes that George Gershwin, during his visit to Paris, asked Maurice Ravel how much the French master would charge to give him composition lessons. Ravel countered by asking Gershwin how much he earned per year, and having digested the information, proceeded to inquire how much Gershwin would charge to give him lessons. At the Hartford Camerata Conservatory, a faculty concert at 3 this afternoon heralds "The Ravel- Gershwin Connection," reflecting research on intriguing harmonic parallels between works by the two composers.
It's a fascinating concept, and the music should be fun too, the roster including Ravel's "Tombeau de Couperin" played by the pianist Eugene Burrus, while the tenor Peter Harvey sings Gershwin tunes backed by the jazz combo of the guitarist Norman Johnson, the bassist Dave Santoro, the drummer Edward Fast and the pianists Walter Gwardyak.
At 4 P.M. today the Chamber Players of the Greenwich Symphony add trumpet and organ to the regular string contingent at St. Barnabas Church, making possible a diverting and far-ranging repertory that stretches from works of Purcell and Corelli on through Mozart, Borodin and two French organists and composers of the 20th century, Jean Langlais and Marcel Dupre (625-9276).
Music for trumpet this week also includes Stephen Burns playing the Haydn Concerto in a Saturday appearance with Gustav Meier and the Greater Bridgeport Symphony; the 8:30 P.M. concert at Klein Memorial Auditorium will feature Shostakovich's Fifth and a recent work by Joan Tower, "Island Rhythms" (576-0263).
Morton Gould will be an honored guest performer when New Music New Haven presents a free all-American chamber music program at 8 P.M. on Thursday in Sprague Memorial Hall (432-4157). At 8 P.M. on Friday audiences for chamber music can enjoy trios by Haydn, Mendelssohn and Brahms in Crowell Hall at Wesleyan University performed by the Massachusetts Chamber Players -- the violinist Charles Treger, the cellist Jennifer Langham and the pianist Estela Kersenbaum-Olevsky -- who are all on the faculty of the University of Massachusetts at Amherst (344-7944).
Opera buffs have a tough choice to make on Saturday, since at 8 P.M. the New Haven curtain goes up on the Shubert Opera's presentation of Donizetti's "Lucia di Lammermoor," Placido Domingo sings in the Hartford Civic Center for Connecticut Opera, and a brand new company, Crystal Opera, bows in Norwalk with a production of Puccini's "Suor Angelica."
Crystal Opera (an outgrowth of Crystal Theater, which has been offering training and performing experiences to children in the Norwalk area) said one of its directors, Arden Anderson-Broecking, "will choose works which will provide good showcases for principal artists and also afford an opportunity for inexperienced people to get their feet wet." Appearing in the title role is Mary Ann Vagnini -- who has, according to Ms. Anderson-Broecking, "one of those Puccini voices to die for." The Saturday performance will be preceded by one on Friday evening, and both will be held in All Saints Catholic School in Norwalk. For more information, call 847-4850.
The concert at the Civic Center "is indeed an auspicious occasion for Connecticut Opera," said the group's general director, George Osborne, about Mr. Domingo's visit to the state. "We have tried to bring this world class superstar to Hartford for some time, and in view of the fact that he's doing only four concerts in North America this season, we are very excited." Why did the renowned tenor choose Hartford? Possibly because 30 years ago, he made his local debut with Connecticut Opera as Cassio in Verdi's "Otello" and went on to star in the company's productions of "Manon Lescaut" and "Cavalleria Rusticana." For tickets call 527-0713.
At the Shubert, Lucia -- in the person of the soprano Maureen O'Flynn -- will be singing to the accompaniment of the New Haven Symphony. The performance will be in the original Italian, but English supertitles, projected on a screen above the stage, will make the convolutions of ploys and plots clear to all. What to do if you want to attend the opera as well as the Domingo concert? Simple: wait for the 2 o'clock "Lucia" repeat next Sunday afternoon. For reservations to either performance, call 624-1825 or 800-228-6622.
Fans of choral music also have triple cause for contentment this week. This afternoon at 4, Richard Donohue leads the choir and instrumental ensembles of South Congregational Church in Hartford in a program of poetry, music and song celebrating Lent and Easter (249-8627). Surrounding those performances are two in Wethersfield encompassing Bach's "St. Matthew Passion." The church's minister of music, David Spicer, leads the choir and cantata singers of First Church of Christ, with the tenor Brian Meneely singing the Evangelist; Part I begins at 3 today, Part II follows a dinner break at 7 (563-7759).
Finally, from Moscow comes the a cappella male ensemble Chorovaya Akademia, which is on its first American tour and making its Connecticut debut with an 8 P.M. Wednesday concert at Jorgensen Auditorium of the University of Connecticut in Storrs. The group's repertory is composed of liturgical pieces, secular songs and a variety of lighter genre and folk tunes (486-4226).
MUSIC
While favoring a strong, traditional lyric line, Mr. Parsi gives his accompaniments a sophisticated, polytonal flavor modeled on Satie, Poulenc and Milhaud. The settings of "El Libro" had a winning wit and terseness; many of the other songs, dating from earlier in Mr. Parsi's career, were somewhat less distinctive. With Max Lifchitz at the piano, the four vocalists -- Eva de la O, soprano; Puli Toro, mezzo-soprano; Eduardo Valdes, tenor; Angelo de la Cruz, baritone -- were able and persuasive.
One clue to the actual worth of unfamiliar music may lie in how well it is being played. Performers are the first music critics, and their command of a new piece can send out potent signals. The Stony Brook Contemporary Chamber Players, at any rate, seemed to like "A Little Light Music" by David Stock last Saturday night. Using a sextet of winds, strings, piano and percussion, the four movements begin with series of two-note phrases, long silences and sustained chords; they end with comfortable melody played against a modest ostinato of drums and cymbals. Several styles are embraced; no axes are ground; a thoroughly professional composer is enjoying himself with taste and inventiveness.
David Dzubay's strongly argued and eminently coherent Trio for violin, cello and piano was played with similar devotion. At the beginning, conventional drama played out in the strings is transformed into something original by an intriguing piano part, one that lags just behind the action and comments in unusual ways. The slow movement is muted and drawling, the finale fiercely relentless.
David Soley's "Tapestries," on the other hand, caused its conductor, Bradley Lubman, and nine young musicians, no end of strain. This is a harsh world full of private messages and difficult performance problems. Its sometimes violent assertions were relieved a little later by Osvaldo Golijov's "Silent Screen," in which two pianos, manipulated to colorful effect, offer an elaborate gloss on a traditional tango song.
Wayne Peterson's "Janus," at the end, gave its nine players some complex designs to handle, but the composer's poise and his graceful blending of instrumental sound helped the busy music hold onto a basic graciousness and easygoing mood. Stony Brook's small army of musicians for this concert demonstrated consistent accomplishment.
Donizetti responded with one of his most musically advanced scores, a clear anticipation of Verdi. The finale to Scene 2, for example, darkens the ensemble's hopeful sentiments ("may this day not be stormy") with restless chromatic lines and odd modulations, conveying the court's sense of desperation and unease. The final scene poses Anne's final decline against the pageantry of Henry's wedding to Jane Seymour (here called Giovanna).
Only in a full staging would the complexity of this drama emerge. Ms. Queler's exceptional cast concentrated more on the musical dimension. The soprano Carol Vaness, in the title role, sang somewhat uncertainly at first, emitting some questionable sounds in the upper register. But she came into her own in the second act, strongly shaping the duet with Giovanna and rendering the closing mad scene in serene, glowing tones. Paul Plishka, the bass, didn't quite project the king's majestic menace, although his singing was splendidly assured.
The one singer who suggested dramatic as well as musical breadth was Gloria Scalchi, a young mezzo-soprano whose extraordinary portrayal of Giovanna drew several well-deserved ovations. Donizetti conceived this role as a second soprano tour-de-force; Ms. Scalchi sailed confidently into her upper range, putting herself on equal footing with Ms. Vaness in the second-act duet. She searingly conveyed the anguish of this woman whose attachment to the monarch dooms Anna and her would-be lovers.
Fernando De La Mora, the tenor singing Percy, did not have as immediately commanding a voice as others in the cast, but he delivered his role accurately and passionately. Melanie Sonnenberg (Smeton), Philip Cokorinos (Rochefort) and Christopher Hux (Hervey) ably filled out the other roles.
The ensemble worked together sonorously in the first act's quintet and sextet. Ms. Queler led a generally strong, occasionally imprecise performance from her orchestra and chorus. At the end, the audience gave a standing ovation to all the performers, in recognition of a remarkable evening of singing.
In "Lucia," Ms. Gruberova joins Neil Shicoff (Edgardo), Alastair Miles (Raimondo) and Alexandru Agache (Enrico), with Richard Bonynge conducting the London Symphony (Teldec 9031-72306). In "La Traviata," her Violetta is partnered by Mr. Shicoff (Alfredo) and Giorgio Zancanaro (Giorgio Germont), with Carlo Rizzi conducting the London Symphony (Teldec 9031-76348).  The other principals in Ms. Studer's "Lucia" are Placido Domingo, Samuel Ramey and Juan Pons, with Ion Marin leading the ubiquitous London Symphony (Deutsche Grammophon 435 309-2). In "Traviata," her partners are Luciano Pavarotti and Mr. Pons, with James Levine leading Metropolitan Opera forces (Deutsche Grammophon 435 797-2).
The comparison works to Ms. Studer's favor. Ms. Gruberova's performances are honorable, but Ms. Studer's vocal instrument, enlivened at long last by convincing dramatic involvement, is able to create a fuller portrayal of the title characters.
Both roles have long attracted birdlike as well as full-voiced sopranos. Lucia has traditionally been the province of Lily Pons-style coloraturas, capable of negotiating the Mad Scene and its ethereal duet with solo flute to eerie pitch perfection. But other types of Lucias have existed, above all Maria Callas, who smudged the notes but made the heroine into a tragic figure with whom all could identify.
The better of the "Lucia" conductors here, Mr. Bonynge, is married to Joan Sutherland, a soprano who, like Ms. Studer, combined technical agility with womanly vocal heft. But in Ms. Gruberova, he has a coloratura Lucia, and one who lacks the last degree of technical perfection; on sustained high notes, she betrays a perceptible quaver.
Still, Ms. Gruberova turns in an excellent portrayal of the type to which her physical characteristics are suited. Her Lucia is hushed, fragile and touching. Her supporting cast is respectable, and Mr. Bonynge's sensitive suppleness is a joy.
Ms. Studer has in recent years made a determined attempt to transform herself from an admired singer of German "youthful heroic" parts, like Wagner's Sieglinde, into an all-purpose international prima donna, adept in every sort of German, French and Italian role. She has had variable success, singing with rock-solid security but often failing to invest her portrayals with much stylistic distinction or dramatic acuity.
So it is a pleasure to report on the high quality of her Lucia and Violetta. Her Lucia coloratura is nearly as secure as Ms. Gruberova's (Ms. Studer shuns a few optional high notes, but those she sings are cleaner than her rival's) and shows a moving, fully human three-dimensionality.
The "Lucia" supporting cast is superior as well, though Mr. Marin's conducting is merely adequate. Mr. Domingo is singing better than ever these days, managing to lighten his tenor to youthful Italianate freshness even after his increasingly frequent forays into Wagner and Strauss. Mr. Pons and Mr. Ramey boom out impressively, and the luxurious casting extends to the rising coloratura mezzo-soprano Jennifer Larmore as the maid Alisa.
Violetta is sometimes described as a role ideally cast with two sopranos -- a coloratura for the febrile animation of the party scenes and a more dramatic instrument for the full-voiced passion of the final act. Ms. Studer's Violetta is even better than her Lucia, because she is able, technically, to encompass all the aspects of the part and, interpretively, to fill the notes with dramatic life.
On the podium, Mr. Levine seems to mirror her interpretation, or maybe it's just that his own ever more Wagnerian pretensions match the weighty intensity of his star. The playing of the Met orchestra is really superb, with every fiery string passage articulated with diabolical precision. Mr. Pavarotti sounds dry and tight, though still full of idiomatic intensity, and Mr. Pons makes a rather too stolid Germont.
Ms. Gruberova's Violetta is again small-scale and delicate, even more surely realized than her Lucia, but lacking in the full range of human emotions. Her conductor, Mr. Rizzi, also seems to tailor his interpretation to his protagonist, in this case going too far: this must be the most intimate, even fussy "La Traviata" ever recorded, with Mr. Rizzi picking his way through music that has to sing out forthrightly. Mr. Shicoff and Mr. Zancanaro surpass their Deutsche Grammophon counterparts, but it's not enough.
RECORDINGS VIEW
The cabaret renaissance of the 1970's helped launch the careers of a number of female performers who had no desire to fit into the ladylike mold of the nightclub chanteuse. One of them was Baby Jane Dexter, a Long Island-born white singer with a hard-edged wailing voice in the black blues tradition. Unlike most cabaret artists, Ms. Dexter had a keen ear for literate rock, folk and blues songs and delivered them as tough, dramatic vignettes.
When the club scene dwindled in the early 80's Ms. Dexter became discouraged enough to quit performing for 10 years. Now back in cabaret, she has just released her debut album. "I Got Thunder" includes songs by Tom Waits ("San Diego Serenade"), Smokey Robinson ("You Really Got a Hold on Me") and Abbey Lincoln (the title track), plus standards like "For All We Know."
Ms. Dexter has some of the belting mannerisms of Jennifer Holliday, Etta James and Cher but combines them with a rowdy sense of humor and an affecting regard for words. She begins "One Meat Ball" -- the Depression-era song about a poor man's night out -- in a broad comic vein, then gradually brings in some of the dark, ironic edge of "Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?"
The album's high points are Felice and Boudleaux Bryant's pop-country hit "Love Hurts," scored with a haunting cello line and sung as a mournful tale of lost dreams, and "When I'm Gone," a ballad written by Phil Ochs in 1966 that resonates deeply in the age of AIDS. Ms. Dexter is backed by an 11-piece group led by the gifted arranger and pianist Ross Patterson, who fills the 12 songs on the album with rich, imaginative touches.
And she's onto something in her music. As the 20th century has shown, genius often lies at the cusp of cultures, at the bilingual exchange of experience and knowledge. Ms. Mercury brought together international pop and regional Brazilian music with such finesse and power that it was hard not to imagine, in a dreamy, weak moment when Middle America was forgotten, that the synthesis would somehow take over the world.
Using all the visual and musical moves of an arena show, Ms. Mercury was making music that was absolutely up to date. Synthesizers fleshed out the sound, rock guitar breaks were littered through the songs, and the lights, which backlighted Ms. Mercury for drama, were more professional than at most Ritz shows. At the same time, the music was powered by vicious samba drumming: roiling, pounding beats that implied nothing but antiquity and regionalism, hardly pop staples. And the result wasn't cliched, or folkloric.
Ms. Mercury ran through songs on her new album, "O Canto da Cidade" (Sony Discos), and the audience, which seemed mostly Brazilian, responded as if it were getting its first home-cooked meal in years. Ms. Mercury stopped the band on one tune, letting the audience sing the chorus by itself; on Caetano Veloso's "Voce Nao Entende Nada," they joined in uninvited. And when Ms. Mercury sang "Bandidos da America," a song that mulls over and celebrates the African cultural influence in America, the crowd cheered as the band settled into the song's reggae-and-samba mixture. Ms. Mercury had clearly figured out her audience. The music and show weren't afraid of either pop pleasure or ethnicity, and gave the audience both an identity and a piece of international pop culture. For that present, the audience responded with love.
This organ, designed to have a French Romantic character, but with enough versatility to allow it to reach back without preciousness into the music of the Baroque era, flourished on Tuesday under the hands of David Higgs, an accomplished organist with an impeccable technique and ear. He devised a program that called on many of the instrument's forces and colorations. The result was impressive indeed, but probably not in the way expected by many listeners, including the organists in attendance.
The entire recital, which ranged from Bach's Fantasy and Fugue in G minor to Durufle's evocative Suite (Op. 5), gave the impression of a clean and crisp instrument; each sonority was sharply outlined. Despite its strong foundations (as organists call the pipes that produce bass tones), its Romantic reeds, and its "Bombarde" division (which provides the instrument's proclamatory power), this organ's achievements were not in weighty evocations of the sublime, but in subtle coloration and musical honesty.
It is as if the instrument were built for grandeur, but refused to insist upon it. It cost $1.25 million, weighs 40 tons, has more than 55,000 parts, with four manuals (keyboards), 5,000 pipes and 68 different stops. It is larger than its nearest local competitors -- such instruments as the von Beckerath organ at St. Michael's Church on Amsterdam Avenue and the Holtkamp organ at All Souls Unitarian Church on Lexington Avenue -- installed during recent decades as part of a return to mechanical rather than electronic controls.
The effect also had something to do with Mr. Higgs's style and choice of stops. Though the performance of Hindemith's Second Sonata meandered (as did David Conte's composition "Pastorale and Toccata"), elsewhere the playing valued structural clarity. Louis-Claude Daquin's 10th "Noel" was played, as prescribed, with crumhorn and cornet stops. Schumann's Canon in B minor, originally written for a piano with pedals, here sounded with flute and clarinet stops. Even Franck's "Piece Heroique" had a restraint not associated with the composer. Only occasionally, as at the close of the Durufle, did Mr. Higgs literally pull out the stops, calling for the full organ. But there, too, one was struck by the transparency and tactile loveliness of the sound, not with its visceral impact or awesome majesty.
As one organist suggested to me, part of the effect might have been due to the capacity audience. The church is sometimes said to be the organ's most important stop, giving the instrument added character. But the filled pews created a human rug, absorbing rather than reflecting the sound. The reverberation time of the church, ordinarily between 3.5 and 4.5 seconds, seemed closer to that of an ordinary concert hall.
The real measure of this instrument, of course, can only be taken over time and over many performances. (Recordings are also planned.) Kent Tritle, the church's principal organist and conductor, sought a versatile religious and musical instrument, which, it seems, he has found.
But the organ's main role is just beginning. The organ is the only instrument that deliberately hides its player; it creates a seemingly autonomous sound world, an imposing association of effects and voices, serving as sonic mirror for the congregation. The most important organ stop may not be the building it is in, but the community for which it is built. That relationship will gradually evolve; music listeners in New York will be the beneficiaries.
Mr. Phillips was as usual a strong and thoughtful player, and all afternoon he provided an anchor for the youth around him. Early on, Dena Levine's piano playing in a Mozart B-flat Trio tended to rush detail and confuse transitions between phrases, but in subsequent slow movements she was highly musical. The Brahms C-minor Quartet does not have an easy keyboard part, but Ms. Levine handled it firmly. The Quintet's piano writing bursts with youth and was in the right hands.
In her big cello solo in the Brahms slow movement, Amy Levine wore heart on sleeve and in the process made a good case for unbridled, almost intemperate passions. Mr. Phillips offered here as everywhere both leadership and a brake on youthful excess. The large audience, with many older people in attendance, took advantage of the reasonable prices (my ticket stub said $6) and the professional performances. They all seemed to enjoy themselves.
Mr. Stuart knows the timing and ornamentation of honky-tonk style, but his voice lacks the stubborn melancholy his idols perfected. That's why he didn't sing many slow tunes, and when he did, he couldn't bring a sense of tragedy to a song like "Long Black Veil" (it's about an execution; at the end, a noose dangled overhead). Uptempo songs, featuring his own pointed guitar solos and dedicated to lust and heartbreak, were well-made and efficiently delivered, echoing Buddy Holly and early George Jones. But unless his voice gains more depth, it's pure hubris to pretend Hank Williams would be a fan.
If only Mr. Stuart could merge with Sammy Kershaw, the opener. Mr. Kershaw is a dedicated follower of George Jones; he summons the tension and ache of Mr. Jones's swoops, pauses and tapered-off lines. He chooses songs that have the detail and wordplay of the best Nashville songwriting. But Mr. Kershaw doesn't match Mr. Stuart's easy stagecraft, and he should have known better than to ask a Manhattan audience, "How many of you ever lived in a mobile home?" That kind of culture clash was one reason the Beacon had so many empty seats on Monday night.
Complete performances of "Vexations" have now become something of a tradition. One pianist has even attempted the feat solo; he stopped after 15 hours, experiencing intense hallucinations. On Saturday and part of Sunday, the downtown performance space Roulette brought "Vexations" back to New York. Once again, a crowd of pianists participated; there was also a procession of official counters, assisted by computer. The audience waxed and waned, from 5 to 30 people. There was, unfortunately, only one reviewer covering the event.
This 20-hour concert, closing a brilliantly varied season at Roulette, was intended to mark the 100th anniversary of "Vexations" and also the composer's birthday. But the monumental character of the affair seemed to have more to do with Cage's procedural avant-gardism than with Satie's bohemian anarchy. There is no evidence that Satie's instruction was anything more than an arcane jest. As the musicologist Richard Taruskin has recently argued, Cage's art was founded in part on a willful misinterpretation of Satie, a plain reading of his paradoxes.
Still, the imposed repetition has the virtue of focusing attention on the revolutionary nature of this music, its defiance of harmonic order. "Vexations" dates from Satie's period of Rosicrucian mysticism; the arcane Masonic-style rites fashionable in the Paris of the 1890's inspired Satie to re-invent harmony as floating, sculptured sound. Sketchy diminished chords alternate in hypnotic succession, with brief melodic shapes drifting through the upper lines and a chaconnelike theme churning in the bass.
Roulette's pianists -- over 20 of them, switching off every hour -- provided a fascinating variety of perspectives. Robert Ashley played the piece with meditative concentration; Joshua Pierce found a beguiling, lilting lyricism; Kirk Nurock imported 20th-century upheaval; Kyle Gann gave the music a marked forward motion, at one point synchronizing his tempo with a car alarm outside; and, at the end of the night, William Duckworth played with uncanny steadiness and stillness. While a few under-rehearsed pianists struggled with the piece's illogical, fiendish notation, no one was participating on a lark.
I arrived at 11 A.M. and stayed through till 4 the next morning, with periodic breaks and one extended crisis of confidence around midnight.  Toward the end, my brain seemed to go completely blank. Epiphany came only during an escape outside onto West Broadway: suddenly, after the insanity of unstoppable pianism within, the night sounds of the city were pure music.
In his 1913 opera "Penelope," performed on Wednesday night and to be repeated next week, Faure portrays Ulysses' return with every extravagance and needless ornament stripped away. Characters are perfectly clear; every interface is a model of creative efficiency. Given its lack of self-promotion, "Penelope" requires precision that neither this performing space nor Opera Manhattan can quite give it. On the other hand, that the opera has been given at all and presented in comprehensible terms makes the enterprise worthwhile.
Gabriel Guimaraes's young company does best with its singers and least well instrumentally. Mr. Guimaraes has arranged Faure's score for double string quartet, harp and occasional flute, but to reflect the color of wind writing he has introduced a marimba, a lovely instrument weirdly inappropriate to the style. The intelligent laboring going on in his small orchestra often lost itself in the church's high ceiling. Pit and stage, though coordinated in time, seemed sometimes separate enterprises.
Christine Seitz sang the title role with clear, straightforward emphasis. Eurymaque (Donald Collup), Euryclee (Keren Bernbaum) and Eumee (David Parsons) were steady presences. Larry Harris, former defensive end for the Houston Oilers and looking every inch of it, sang Ulysses. This is a major tenor voice in embryo. The size and quality emerge intermittently. Mr. Harris needs mainly an easier, loosened top register to match the rest of his promising voice.
Punk rock fans bemoaning the fact that there was nothing pure and incorruptible left in this world were heartened by the emergence in 1983 of the Butthole Surfers. The Texas band's truly infernal racket -- caterwauling boasts about smoking Elvis Presley's toenails -- and its very name seemed to resist assimilation into the rock mainstream.
Ten years later, the band has released its first major-label album, and, more improbably still, its producer is John Paul Jones, better known as the bassist for those thunder gods of classic rock, Led Zeppelin. The album also happens to be the group's best in some time.
The lead vocalist, Gibby Haynes, wisely realizing that he peaked on the offensiveness scale years ago, offers lyrics that are no more or less deranged than the most outre ramblings of the Texas psychedelic avatars, the 13th Floor Elevators. The music is meaty, riff-based guitar rock, heavy on the grease. While the Butthole Surfers' recent output has been overly reliant on spacey noodling, Mr. Jones keeps the band tightly focused here, offering a 17-song set that actually gains in momentum as it goes on.
That's no small accomplishment, considering that the opening cut, "Who Was in My Room Last Night?," is one of the most propulsive tunes in the band's history. "Independent Worm Saloon" ought to jolt the scruples out of disgruntled punk purists.
For Ms. Lauper, pop is an outlet for benevolence; her songs, written with assorted collaborators, usually promise love, unqualified affection and emotional support: "You can't define yourself in terms of someone else," she insists in "Dear John." Other songs tell subtle stories, such as "Sally's Pigeons," a ballad written with Mary-Chapin Carpenter about a childhood friend who dies after a "back alley job," and the funk-driven "Broken Glass," about a battered woman.
Ms. Lauper obviously wants to sound contemporary. A few songs opened with a hip-hop drumbeat, although they quickly reverted to a jaunty Celtic-sounding march ("That's What I Think") or a pop-rock bounce ("Lies"). But modern hip-hop is only one element in Ms. Lauper's pop vocabulary. Three of her strongest songs looked back to the 1960's: "Who Let In the Rain," which draws on Brill Building rock and Bruce Springsteen's update of it; "Dear John," with a Rolling Stones-style slide-guitar riff, and "Like I Used To," which borrows from Motown's girl groups while rejecting their acquiescence: "ain't gonna be the way it used to." The band of four women and five men easily handled everything from delicate ballads to Cajun-tinged folk-rock (with Ms. Lauper scraping a rubboard, a washboard vest) to pushy funk.
In the past, Ms. Lauper has sometimes used her wide vocal range for gimmicky effects, but she now rations her siren high notes and little-girl mews, carefully placing them where they'll fit a song's mood. She keeps her vocal power in reserve until it's time to belt an angry line, make a word quaver with emphasis or fly up to a jubilant peak, as in "A Part Hate," an anti-racism song with a buoyant quasi-African groove.
When Ms. Lauper became an arena performer in the mid-1980's, she let her shows grow too controlled. But at Irving Plaza, she had her old assurance and ease on stage, joking with an audience that couldn't stop shouting endearments and encouragement. Introducing "Feels Like Christmas," a triumphant love song, she said that sometimes her new husband, upon waking up, may feel like it's Halloween.
For encores, Ms. Lauper radically reworked "Girls Just Wanna Have Fun" as a reggae song with a dance-hall rap by her percussionist, Pierre Andre. She also performed "True Colors" with only a fiddle and a backup singer as accompaniment. She's confident enough to toy with her old repertory because her new songs are so strong. And when, in the closing "Change of Heart," she did the twitchy dance moves that used to rule MTV, it was clear that the new Cyndi Lauper still embraces the old one.
To close its 29th season, the Choral Symphony Society and Cantata Singers presented Handel's "Jephtha" on Sunday afternoon. Handel's last oratorio, "Jephtha" is almost operatic in its demands on vocal technique and stamina. David Labovitz, the ensemble's founder and conductor, led his group in a performance that for the most part did justice to both the music and the drama it animates.
Mr. Labovitz made a few judicious trims and agreed with Paul Henry Lang's assertion that the work should end with the "Theme sublime" chorus rather than "Ye House of Gilead."
With the exception of a single bobbled entrance in the last act, the choir produced a gorgeously blended sound, dark and velvety in the devotional choruses and full-bodied and robust in the more outgoing, descriptive ones. And the small orchestra with both harpsichord and organ continuo produced a trim, stylish sound.
The soloists, mostly drawn from the choir, were of varied accomplishment. The best was Adrian Michael, whose lovely tenor and thoughtful approach to coloration made for a sympathetic presentation of the title role. Jacqueline Marx, whose mezzo-soprano had an appealing copper tint, and Gregg Lauterbach, a powerful baritone, made solid contributions as Storge and Zebul.
The cast also included Gurcell Henry, whose voice was alternately sweet and forced as Iphis; Phyllis Whitehouse, who did nicely with the brief Angel role, and Martin Gonzalez, a wobbly countertenor who sang Hamor.
Mr. Slatkin adopted a very measured pace at the outset. The orchestra projected a dark, massive tone that avoided extremes of despair: morbid, but not moribund. The shift into headlong wildness at the center of the movement had the right dramatic force, and the trumpet solos were magnificent.
The "Sturmisch bewegt" movement that follows is perhaps the most strenuous of the whole cycle. Mahler here subjects the orchestra to a challenge that he would repeat even more cruelly in the Sixth: a second movement that provides no obvious contrast to the first. The solution, I think, is to interpret the score's instruction, "with the greatest vehemence," as a rapid rhythmic drive that shoves aside the solemn tread of the first movement. (The Rondo-Burlesque of the Ninth is just around the corner.)
But Mr. Slatkin failed to draw out a crisp, organizing pulse. The woodwinds' nervous flurries of sound dissolved rather then preserved tension, and episodes like the "langsam" lament for cellos became uncertain lulls. The movement's climactic outburst, the final "pesante" section, was puzzlingly rushed and muted.
A sense of disorientation continued into the scherzo. In this movement, the spotlight falls hotly on the horns, and the Philharmonic's players did not deliver an especially lustrous or polished sound. The rest of the orchestra seemed a bit exhausted; again, the dramatic contrasts failed to emerge sharply (an encroaching atmosphere of menace in the central tutti passages, for example). This kind of playing brings back the fidgety bewilderment felt by Mahler's early audiences.
A swift and disciplined account of the Adagietto brought considerable relief. Mr. Slatkin has sensibly joined the reaction against a very slow tempo in this movement (the languid pacing associated with Leonard Bernstein). But the string phrasing would need more definition, and also more passion, for this Mengelbergian approach to have its full impact.
In the finale, the orchestra made up handsomely for previous shortcomings. Brass choirs gleamed, woodwinds scampered with maniacal precision and Mr. Slatkin pressed forward at a breathless pace. The enthusiastic applause was well deserved. The Fifth is a big enough work that, even if some of its internal narratives do not come off, the overall impression can be a positive one.
The evening began with "In Praise of Shahn" by William Schuman, given its premiere by the Philharmonic under Bernstein in 1970. Brilliant episodes in Schuman's brass-based declamatory style frame an arduous string threnody at the center. The orchestra gave a committed performance, fighting the lingering balance problem in Avery Fisher Hall that favors brass over strings.
The acoustics of the hall, generally much improved this year, were, in fact, a distraction throughout the evening. All the old nightmares mysteriously returned: glazed-over strings, brass and woodwinds blaring unexpectedly, slight taps of percussion shooting out of nowhere. At all times one was aware of the activities of the tuba. Mr. Slatkin's Fifth would gain coherence if balances were adjusted accordingly.
The problem is to determine just what the connection might be. The Nazi example has, for better and worse, become a paradigm of such relations and has been raised again and again in recent months. Mr. Shirakawa's biography made a case for Furtwangler as an esthetic idealist who believed that he compromised neither his morality nor his art by staying in Germany. The New York Public Library presented an exhibition of art and music condemned by the Nazis, drawing on Nazi exhibitions of "entartete" ("degenerate") art and music from 1937 and 1938. London Records also began releasing an ambitious series of CD's of "Entartete Musik" (with operas by Krenek and Korngold as the first releases).
Much of the recent fascination with this period arises from an attempt, as London's liner notes put it, to argue for tolerance and free speech in the arts. Given controversies about art and politics involving the National Endowment for the Arts, the Nazi example is meant to be cautionary, a warning against those who dare condemn art as "degenerate." It is meant to show where such condemnations can lead.
But the Nazi example actually has very different implications. It does not encourage bland acceptance of art; instead, it suggests that when art is taken seriously, its political implications must be as well. And the Nazi Government, like other totalitarian states, took art very seriously indeed. It was not, like the endowment, simply withdrawing financing for artists. It declared that art had to serve the state or be condemned, with its creators, to destruction. And ironically, cruelly and perversely, the Nazis were right.
They were right, that is, to see the music they condemned as threatening and alien. Partly, of course, the matter was simply one of racial identification. As the library exhibition pointed out, the Nazi regime commissioned 44 different composers to write incidental music for "A Midsummer Night's Dream" to replace the popular score by Mendelssohn, who was born a Jew. A detailed lexicon catalogued the proportion of Jewish blood in every composer.
Jazz was also attacked for its racial origins. And Goebbels called atonal music "the product of the Jewish spirit," referring to Arnold Schoenberg. "Whoever eats of it," Goebbels said, "will die." Krenek's opera "Jonny Spielt Auf" was condemned partly because of the jazz style that permeates it and partly because of the implications of the libretto and its restless score; its title character -- who was so popular in Weimar Germany that a cigarette was named after him -- is a black saxophonist who boldly proclaims the end of the European Old World and the beginning of the American New.
Goebbels's esthetic judgments, though, were quite acute and went beyond race: There is an incompatibility between a culture that demands mass uniformity and discipline, and a music like Schoenberg's, which is introspective and distraught. Crowds could sing along with Hitler's anthem, the "Horst Wessel Lied," but not hum along with Schoenberg's Variations for Orchestra. The rhythms of 1930's swing and the improvisatory freedom of jazz were intrinsically unsettling when what was required was unisons, resolutions and predictability. Totalitarian governments have been savvy about the political powers of music. Two decades ago, China banned Beethoven, disturbed by the music's bourgeois celebration of the independent mind.
These feared characteristics are not imposed on scores; they are inscribed within them. "Musical forms are internalizations of social forms," wrote the German philosopher Theodor Adorno. He meant that a composition can mirror society; it can be explored for political meanings. Furtwangler's defense was actually a disagreement over interpretation of those forms. The Nazis heard the glorification of German genius in the classical repertory; he heard other, more nuanced meanings, opposed to Nazi ideology. Musical interpretation is partly political interpretation.
So we should learn from the horrors of Nazi criticism by attending to meanings in music we might otherwise overlook; the meaning of a musical work is never purely abstract and always partly political. Furtwangler's defense, naive as it was, asserts something even more important: Great music may have political implications, but it is never entirely political. We may add: When music is only political, it is not fully musical.
CLASSICAL VIEW
Another monthly presenter of outstanding young artists is the South Shore Music Club, celebrating 60 years of service to the community with a Friday evening cycle at Pequot Library in Southport. This week, Scott Yoo, a violinist from Korea and winner of the Josef Gingold and Young Concert Artists International Competitions, is joined by the Taiwanese-born pianist Li-Pi Hsieh, who was brought to the United States by Richard Goode and also studied with Rudolf Serkin. Their 8:30 P.M. program is devoted to sonatas by Debussy as well as by Bach, Beethoven and Brahms; for more information, call 227-6943 or 226-1076.
Outdoor music listening is not necessarily an audiophile's delight, but al fresco concerts undeniably have their special charms, and the early summer skies are beckoning in a number of communities. The 44th annual Plumb Memorial Carillon Concerts begin Thursday evening at 7, continuing weekly through Aug. 25 (rain or shine) on the Quadrangle of Trinity College in Hartford. If you prefer indoor listening, the June and July bell-ringings will be preceded by 6 o'clock chamber concerts inside the Chapel. All of these events are free (297-2138).
The second annual Summer Solstice Celebration begins 5 P.M. Friday in Hartford, as four groups of dancers proceed in improvisational procession from the corners of Bushnell Park to its center, where dance and drumming exhibitions follow, along with a movement choir, which is described as "a group experience that will draw participants into a sense of community and participation." Participation in the celebration is free, but in the event of rain, the movement will be to the sheltering quarters of the Charter Oak Cultural Center. For more details, call 233-8333.
Next year marks the centennial of the New Haven Symphony but the orchestra isn't waiting until fall to begin its celebrations. Already underway is a free outdoor series, with the group's assistant conductor, Peter Sacco, (who next month will be presiding at his own Summer Music Festival at Harkness Park in Waterford) leading a pops-style program, at 7:30 P.M. on Friday at the West Haven Green, 7 next Sunday on the Branford Green, and at 7:30 P.M. on June 26, on the North Haven Green. Bailey Middle, Branford High and North Haven High Schools are the respective rain sites; for more details, call 776-1444.
Hilton Ruiz and Giovanni Hidalgo lead off four Friday evenings of jazz on June 25 at the Charles Ives Center for the Arts, at Western State Connecticut University in Danbury. (Tickets are $15). Four free Sundays in the Park, sponsored by Union Savings Bank and WLAD Radio, start next Sunday at 2, when Ronald McDonald and the vaudeville troupe known as Bounce and Ooo La La will appear. Telephone reservations are accepted (with a surcharge) through TicketMaster at 624-0030 or 525-4500, or you can order tickets by mail, writing the center at Post Office Box 2957, Danbury Conn. 06813.
Connecticut Grand Opera is skipping opera to concentrate on its orchestra at its all-Beethoven concert next weekend, while Connecticut Concert Opera departs from its policy of concert performances to offer a choreographed Act Two of Strauss's "Fledermaus."
John Wadhams of the Concert Opera organization said the Fledermaus presentation will be in English, "with an expanded gala sequence featuring this and last season's best, along with some surprises -- maybe a trumpet, a magician, who knows?" He said the festivities would open on Friday at 8:15 P.M., and repeat next Sunday afternoon at 3 at the recently refurbished Wallace Stevens Theater in Hartford. The reservations number is 722-2300.
In between those two performances comes what Anita Luery of Connecticut Grand organization has dubbed "a triumphant season finale concert, with the spotlight shining on one of the strongest components of the company, the orchestra." The program lists Beethoven's Prometheus Overture, the concert aria "Ah, perfido" and the Seventh Symphony, with Camellia Johnson the soprano soloist and the company's artistic director, Laurence Gilgore, on the podium. Last year Ms. Johnson made her debut at the Metropolitan Opera in addition to winning the Young Concert Artists International Auditions. 8 P.M. Saturday is concert time at the Stamford Palace (359-0009).
Another operatic opportunity comes next Sunday as part of the Connecticut Early Music Festival, as Will Crutchfield conducts Handel's "Radamisto" with Laura Danehower, Nancy Herrera, Nathaniel Watson, Charles Workman and other soloists, and an ensemble of period instrumentalists. Mr. Crutchfield will give a free lecture on the historical background of the opera starting at 4:30 P.M. in the Ernst Common Room of Connecticut College in New London; the performance itself begins at 6 in Harkness Chapel (444-2419).
MUSIC
The demonstration piece was Hannibal Peterson's "African Portraits," a kind of multicultural oratorio by which African and African-American music, rather than being laboriously interwoven with its European counterpart, simply moves into its house. The power of venue alone -- the taking of African storytelling, joyous work choruses, blues laments and be-bop improvisation and placing them on a stage usually reserved for Mahler or Mozart -- becomes a message all its own. It says that my music belongs in your home and yours in mine.
Mr. Peterson glues together his historical survey with quasi-operatic scenes from the era of slavery and by means of orchestral tone painting. The first device is exuberantly melodramatic, the second serviceable but not very striking. It is the unadulterated outpouring of black culture and the diverse forces representing it here that give "African Portraits" life: Marvin James Sewell's reticent blues style, Vanessa Bell Armstrong's extravagant gospel singing, Papa Susso's griot narrations, the various instrumental ensembles and especially the ebullient Morgan State University Choir.
Paul Lustig Dunkel conducted the Peterson. The rest of the evening offered difficult music, strikingly performed by the orchestra and directed by Dennis Russell Davies. Carolyn Yarnell's "Living Mountains" and the Sessions Sixth Symphony represented luxury embraced as opposed to luxury denied. Ms. Yarnell's tone poem incorporates all the familiar modern American themes: repetition, clamorous and colorful textures, layers of diverse meters and the like. "Living Mountains" is at its best -- and that best I found engaging -- in the boiling tuttis, where differing movements rub energetically against one another. The Sessions, in contrast, was all hard-nosed energy and surefooted purpose, a piece that does not seduce but instead demands respect on its own harsh terms.
The other music was Act I, Scene 3, from Philip Glass's opera "The Voyage." With Victoria Litherland's strong soprano competing well against Mr. Glass's big orchestra and with the Morgan State singers adding their enthusiasms, the music's repetitions and snail-paced evolutionary procedures held the attention and entertained the ear.
Although Mr. Haggard is now one of country's touchstones, someone whose inflections are imitated by a generation of young men in cowboy hats, he's no kind of purist. Like one of his own idols, the Western swing pioneer Bob Wills, he'll borrow from anywhere: blues, rhythm-and-blues, be-bop. The Strangers include fiddle and steel guitar on the country side and a saxophonist (who doubles on trumpet) for touches of jazz; one lead guitarist is steeped in be-bop while the other plays plunky, twangy country lines.
At times Mr. Haggard and the two guitarists shared ensemble riffs like a big-band horn section. And the songs were as likely to use chromatic Tin Pan Alley harmonies as they were to stay within three-chord country formulas. In "Silver Wings," a ballad, the music became almost liquid, with shimmering guitars; uptempo songs had a crisp swing.
Mr. Haggard writes and sings love songs -- often lost-love songs -- but he also delves into songs of working-class discontent (the inevitable "Okie From Muskogee") rambling songs (like "White Line Fever," which he said the band no longer knew) and drinking songs. Mr. Haggard, who was drinking mineral water on stage, introduced "The Bottle Let Me Down" by asking how many alcoholics were in the audience: "Sounds like an A.A. meeting in here," he said.
But Mr. Haggard chose an odd assortment of songs for his set, leaning toward love songs and autumnal sentiments, on the verge of sentimentality, rather than working-class observations or stories. And his relaxed tempos were punctuated by distracting audience noise, disturbing the concentration of one of country's best improvisers. But the show was a chance to see one icon who still invents his own rules, and who lives up to them a good part of the time.
The concert was, in a small way, a family affair. Mr. Haggard's son Noel opened the show by singing two songs with the Strangers; he has inherited his father's cheekbones and some of his baritone voice, but only a fraction of his calm stage presence. A smiling woman who stood throughout the concert in the band's back ranks, and came forward to sing a few phrases of backup vocals, was Bonnie Owens, the singer's ex-wife.
When Mr. Gil sings, usually accompanying himself softly on an acoustic guitar, his slightly roughened baritone often leaps into a freewheeling, changeable falsetto whose microtonal shadings can suggest the caws of a wild bird. If his intense percussive clicks and animalistic cries put the sounds of nature near the center of his music, his singing never strays so far from a sense of musical form that his improvisations become mere sound effects.
Mr. Gil sang and spoke in both Portuguese and English during ashow in which he consciously sought to place his music in a historical context. Early in the evening, he spoke of the Afro-Caribbean musical tradition in Bahia, and its relation to the candomble religion and its panoply of deities known as orixas. In a tribute to Dorival Caymmi, the Bahian composer whose fishermen's songs and religious invocations were a major influence on his generation of songwriters, he led the audience in a call-and-response samba tune.
Later in the show, Mr. Gil recalled his three-year exile in London in 1969, when he and other young musical innovators were advised by the Brazilian military regime to leave the country. Besides his acknowledgement of Mr. Caymmi, Mr. Gil paid individual tributes to Stevie Wonder, Chuck Berry and Bob Marley. In honor of Mr. Wonder, he sang a samba-inflected rendition of "The Secret Life of Plants," that, coming from the lips of a Brazilian musician, carried inevitable associations with the imperiled rain forest.
Marley was remembered in a stirring audience participation version of "No Woman, No Cry." And in "Chuck Berry Fields Forever," the rock-and-roll pioneer was the central figure in a eccentric samba-flavored homage to rock that at moments echoed the Beatles' "Strawberry Fields Forever."
Gal Costa came out late in the evening and sang only two numbers (one as a duet with Mr. Gil), but she made her one solo, a sultry English-language version of Cole Porter's "Laziest Gal in Town" drip with innuendo. At the end of the show, she and Ms. Elias presented a floral tribute to the composer and led the audience in two jubilant choruses of "Happy Birthday."
Leading off the evening programs next Saturday are Les Guirivoires, a company of 40 musicians, singers and dancers exploring the rich traditions of the Ivory Coast. On July 17, the group Cherish the Ladies will focus on Irish songs and dances. On July 24, the Near Eastern Music Ensemble and Dancers will sample the culture of more than a dozen countries in the Arabic world.
Classical works by Latin American composers distinguish the July 31 visit of the ensemble Alborada Latina, which will offer music of Villa-Lobos, Ginastera and others interspersed with popular dance tunes and folksongs. The Aug. 7 finale -- strictly for pop and jazz fans -- brings the Serenaders in Blue (retired auxiliary policemen) and the Arnie Mig Orchestra with tributes to Glenn Miller and Benny Goodman and other music for dancing under the stars.
The children's programs begin next Saturday as Ken and John Butler demonstrate "in a madcap musical performance" how musical instruments can be fashioned from household objects. On July 17, Los Pleneros de la 21 take the youngsters on a musical journey to Puerto Rico. Nai Ni Chin and Company explores "The Art of Chinese Dance" on July 24. The dancers of Manhattan Tap display "the thrilling moves and syncopating rhythms of this thoroughly American art form" on July 31. On Aug. 7, Theatre Sports helps the audience improvise scenes "that focus on language development, cooperation, linking of ideas and fun." Afternoon shows begin at 2 o'clock, evening concerts at 7:30. The Saunders School will serve as a concert hall in case of rain. For more details, the number to call is 377-6442.
The Hudson River Museum in Yonkers lays claim to Fantastic Fridays, with free admission to various lectures, exhibitions, star shows in the Andrus Planetarium, in fact everything except Summer Jazz concerts. The opening reception, next Friday from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M., includes a demonstration by Katherine Teck of her homemade percussion instruments, and at the final evening on Aug. 27, there will be the strains of music by performers from the Westchester Conservatory.
The jazz series will consist of three 8 P.M. concerts: return visits by the Bill Saxton Quartet on July 16 and the Bill Doggett Quartet on Aug. 13 and a July 30 debut by Ray Schinnery, a Mount Vernon resident known for his blues singing and his guitar playing. The programs are held in the courtyard if weather permits; otherwise, in the auditorium. More details on these and other summer events are available by calling the museum at 963-4550.
The Bronx Arts Ensemble, normally a bastion of classical music, has spawned a Dixieland Band under the leadership of Bernie Berger, which will perform this afternoon at 2 o'clock. The annual free concert at Woodlawn Cemetery (use the Jerome Avenue Gate at Bainbridge Avenue in the Bronx) features favorites of such popular-music and jazz giants as George M. Cohan, Duke Ellington, Irving Berlin and Miles Davis. Cathy Gale and Johnny Amoroso are the assisting vocalists, and in case of rain, the festivities move indoors to Woolworth Chapel. The numbers to call for more details are (718) 920-0500 or (718) 601-7399.
Caramoor is celebrating the Fourth of July today at 5:30 P.M. with the tenor Jerry Hadley and Rob Fisher's Coffee Club Orchestra spotlighting "music from the theater and the heyday of American song."
An important piece of classical Americana, Aaron Copland's Sextet, stands alongside Beethoven's String Quintet in E flat when the pianist Ursula Oppens joins the St. Luke's Chamber Ensemble at Thursday's recital at 4:14 P.M. in the Spanish Courtyard at Caramoor. The soprano Camilla Johnson will add a group of Beethoven's charming Irish folksong settings.
Vladimir Feltsman, who has been recording all of the Bach piano concertos with the Orchestra of St. Luke's, makes his Caramoor debut playing four of those concertos with the orchestra Friday at 8:30 P.M. in the Venetian Theater.
On Saturday at 8:30 P.M. music by three other B's (four if you count the solo violinist, Joshua Bell) light up the evening at Caramoor. Roger Norrington will conduct Beethoven's "Leonore Overture" No. 3, the Bruch G minor Violin Concerto and Brahms's Second Symphony. The number to call for more information is 232-1252.
Further signs of summer are the audience sing-ins sponsored every July by the Pleasantville Cantata Singers in the Mount Pleasant Public Library. On tap at the opening session on Wednesday at 8:15 P.M. are the Vivaldi "Gloria" and Beethoven's Mass in C, with David Randolph on the podium and Theora Cultice accompanying at the piano. Listeners as well as singers are welcome, and scores will be provided, although those who have one are asked to bring it. The information numbers are 769-2658 and 769-2134.
The fourth annual Mohonk Festival of the Arts has enough interesting programs to make a trip to New Paltz worthwhile. The festival takes place daily starting this Friday when Richard Kiley reminisces about his singing and acting career and running through Aug. 20 when there will be an evening of international dance by the Vanaver Caravan. In between are dramatic readings, mime, cabaret and chamber music, tap dancing and ragtime.
The roster includes such distinguished musicians as the violin-piano duo of Charles Libove and Nina Lugavoy, the pianist-composer Peter Schickele, the folksinger Oscar Brand, the clarinetist Michael Webster, the ragtime singer-pianist Max Morath, members of the Leontovych Quartet (from Ukraine) and the pianist who serves as artistic director of the festival, Robert Guralnik.
A series of afternoon programs for younger listeners on Saturdays at 5 o'clock begins this week with the country music, storytelling and clog dancing of Richard Stillman and Marty Laster. Evening concerts begin at 9 o'clock. For a festival brochure, driving directions or reservations, the number to call is 255-4500.
MUSIC
The performance was deftly shaped, and both choral and instrumental work were generally fine, particularly among the horns. But the brute mass of singers and the colorless tone of Carnegie's Rodgers organ detracted from the overall effect. Still, Mr. Rutter's command of the music brought an uncommon stillness over the hall and drew an ovation afterward.
Also on the program were sturdy, occasionally rough-edged renderings of Mozart's "Exsultate Jubilate" and 1779 Magnificat, Haydn's second Te Deum, and the Vivaldi Magnificat in G minor. Mr. Rutter, Hanan Yaqub and Noel Crawford Lovelace switched off on the podium.
Evelyn de la Rosa warbled sweetly throughout in the soprano parts, but Anita Terzian brought a disturbingly raw mezzo-soprano tone to the two Magnificats. Alberto Sanchez, a tenor, and William Walker, a bass-baritone, also sang; Mr. Walker returned after intermission with Ms. de la Rosa for characterful solos in the Faure.
German Baroque counterpoint and New York summer heat do not, it turns out, make an ideal combination. On Wednesday night, Douglas Drake, the associate organist at St. Michael's Church, made his way through an all-Bach program in conditions that could only be described as ovenlike.  One wit in the audience commented that it gave new meaning to the phrase "sweatin' to the oldies."
Inevitably there were some slips and a certain loss of focus. Mr. Drake tended toward slow tempos, and the denser passages of the three preludes and fugues -- BWV 566, 539, and 535 -- often sounded laborious. But he brought a more lucid touch to the chorale variations on "O Gott, du frommer Gott" and to a pleasing selection of chorale preludes, culminating in "Valet will ich dir geben." Also on the program was the Concerto in D Minor after Vivaldi.
The von Beckerath organ, a meticulous neo-Baroque creation, was splendid to hear throughout. The chorale variations showed up its rich softer colors, yet the climaxes had a solid power. This is one of the better instruments in the city, and a coming restoration will presumably bring it to an even higher level.
The church's "Bach on the von Beckerath" series concludes on Wednesday with a recital by Claudia Dumschat.
Next Sunday at that same hour, the Chester Quartet, ensemble in residence at Indiana University, presents the last of the Razoumovskys, Beethoven's Op. 59, No. 3, along with Ives's Quartet No. 1 and, assisted by Pamela Mia Paul, Mozart's Piano Quartet in E-flat (K. 493). For details call 496-2596.
Beethoven's Ninth Symphony has been chosen by Peter Sacco to open the 10th anniversary season of Summer Music, at 8 P.M. on Saturday in Harkness Memorial Park, New London, along with the Piano Concerto No. 4, with Awadagin Pratt as soloist. Mr. Sacco will be leading the Connecticut Orchestra and, in the finale of the Ninth, the professional singers of Connecticut Choral Artists.
Since Connecticut Choral Artists has 32 members, and a chorus of 80 is needed for the Beethoven, the group is offering a three-day workshop beginning Wednesday at Connecticut College devoted not only to rehearsals of the Beethoven but also to related repertory, classes in voice production and coaching in German diction.
The group's director, Catherine Stockman, also said there would be plenty of time to enjoy nearby beaches. Admission to the workshop, she said, would be based on experience, references or audition and the need to have a balanced ensemble. The group's office may be reached at 224-7500 for more information.
The Tokyo String Quartet will play an 8:30 P.M. Friday recital at the Norfolk Festival devoted to Mozart, Debussy and Brahms. Italian music is the Saturday focus at that hour, the "Notte a Venezia" including works of Gabrieli, Vivaldi, Monteverdi and Rossini, along with a new piece, "Opere della Musica Povera" by Yale faculty composer Martin Bresnick.
Two prize-winning participants in the Venetian evening, the Lydian String Quartet and the Meridian Arts Ensemble, will be back at Norfolk next Sunday afternoon at 3, the former ensemble playing quartets of Mendelssohn and Ives, the latter extending its repertory from Bach transcriptions to the world premiere of Scott Lindroth's Brass Quintet and a transcription of Frank Zappa's "Big Swifty." For telephone reservations, call 542-5537.
Also marking its 10th birthday is Connecticut Valley Harmony's Shape Note Singing Convention. Group singing of hymns from "Sacred Harp," a collection of songs published in 1844, will be the primary order of musical business today from 10 A.M. until about 4:30 P.M., with both listeners and singers -- of all voice parts and levels of experience -- invited to attend the festivities without charge. The meeting place is First Church of Christ, Congregational, on Court Street in Middletown; for more details call 583-0841.
"Summer Series" continues at Wesleyan University in Middletown. On Tuesday at 12:10 P.M. in the World Music Hall, a group called the Yugotones -- directed by Mirjana Lausevic, a graduate student from Sarajevo -- is performing traditional and contemporary music from Bosnia.
On Wednesday at that hour, Willie Feuer and Susan Matheke are giving a lecture-demonstration on the Argentine tango, the couple returning at 8 P.M. on Thursday to offer a more formal concert of tango and other dance duets in the Center for the Arts Theater. Telephone reservations are not accepted for these events, but the general information number is 347-9411, ext. 2867.
On Saturday, one of the superstars of folk, Harry Belafonte, brings some of his calypso hits, South African songs and ballads and blues to the Charles Ives Center for the Arts. 8 P.M. is concert time on the westside campus of Western Connecticut State University; for more details, call 797-4002.
The Aston Magna Festival is celebrating its 21st summer in the Berkshires, and the Mohawk Trail Concerts are up to season No. 24 in Charlemont.
Aston Magna, one of the pioneering ensembles in the early music field, ventures into the 18th century on Saturday with vocal and instrumental pieces of Schubert and Beethoven as well as those of Mauro Giuliani and Ignaz Moscheles.
On July 24 an evening of "The Concerted Madrigal" is planned, pre-baroque chamber works are featured on July 31, and Handel's "Acis and Galatea" closes the season Aug. 7. All concerts start at 6 P.M. in St. James Church of Great Barrington; for tickets or travel directions, call 413-528-3595.
The Mohawk Trail programs are each given twice, Fridays and Saturdays at 8 P.M., and it's back to the baroque at the opening pair this week, with assorted arias and sonatas as well as Bach's Brandenburg Concerto No. 5. Later highlights include Beethoven's "Archduke" Trio (July 23-24), a cabaret evening with Joan Morris and William Bolcom (Aug. 6-7), the world premiere of Donald Wheelock's Sonata for Viola and Piano (Aug. 13-14) and, at the finales (Aug. 20-21), the Schubert "Trout" Quintet. For a complete schedule or other information, call 413-625-9511.
MUSIC
Here it is, the 10th anniversary of the compact disk revolution, and I miss LP's.
Well, "miss" isn't exactly right. A few thousand of them still fill a wall in my apartment, and my turntable still holds its place at the center of the stereo system. But that wall of LP's used to be part of a growing collection. Now the disks are relics of a receding age, and the collection is shrinking because, like many people, I have given in to the convenience of the CD. When a favorite old LP is reissued on CD, I usually take the LP off the shelf and throw it on a growing stack in a dark closet.
There are exceptions, of course. Some are LP's that are especially valuable in their original vinyl pressings, but most are albums that are surrounded by an aura of personal nostalgia. One example is "Nine Masterpieces Conducted by the Composer," a six-LP set of Stravinsky's recordings of his own works packaged in a silver box. I remember seeing the set in record shop windows in the early 1970's, feeling that it was too expensive to own (it couldn't have cost much more than $40). I remember saving up for it, buying it and then indulging in weeks of Stravinskymania. Now I have all those recordings on CD. But I can't bring myself to jettison that tattered old silver box.
In fact, I find that when I have time for leisurely, off-hours listening, I am increasingly drawn to the LP shelves rather than to the CD's. In a way that I cannot entirely explain, CD's have come to seem like data; LP's still seem like music. That is, I realize, a scientifically indefensible distinction, but the more I speak with friends and colleagues, the more I realize I am not alone in seeing CD's as decidedly more artificial than their predecessors.
I won't argue the relative sonic merits of the formats. That battle has raged unabated in the audiophile world for the decade that CD's have been with us. Having spent many an hour running A/B comparisons between LP's and their CD counterparts, I have concluded that in some cases the CD is an improvement and in others the LP is unmistakably superior.
Nor am I looking at the LP era entirely through rose-colored glasses. The LP had its problems, no question about it. By the mid-1970's, American pressing quality had deteriorated to the point where in any batch of a dozen LP's, at least eight would be afflicted with pops, clicks and crackle on the first playing, and they could be expected to get noisier with time.
Handling LP's carefully and keeping them clean was no guarantee of longevity. And turntables required considerable maintenance. Compact disks, by contrast, were easy to handle and did not wear. The ability to jump from track to track, or to put the recording on pause, all by remote control, was a definite attraction, and so was the format's longer playing time (when companies took advantage of it). For those reasons and quite a few others -- not least, a bad case of gadget lust -- I was thrilled with CD's when they hit the market.
But now I have doubts. Mostly, what bothers me is the CD format's esthetic, or lack of one. Let's begin at the record store. Remember what they were like a decade ago? The walls were full of LP jackets, 12-inch square album covers that either shouted or whispered their contents to the passer-by, and could easily be spotted from 50 paces. Now the stores are full of reflective plastic cases less than a quarter the size of an LP. To see what they are, you have to sidle up close to them and squint.
It doesn't get much better once you get them home. A wall of LP's has the warm, inviting look of a library. A wall of CD's is a wall of plastic, cold and industrial. CD's don't take up much less room, either. Although they are less than half an LP's height, they are twice as thick, and entirely unyielding. If you have a shelf that comfortably holds 25 LP's, you can fit 30 if you try. If you have a shelf that holds 25 CD's, that's all it holds. And despite the extra spine width, record companies apparently consider it a point of honor to make CD spines more difficult to read than LP spines.
In the LP days, record store bins were packed with big, flat platters, and flipping through them was fun. A shopper could while away an afternoon looking at cover art or getting a surreptitious musical education by reading a few sets of liner notes.
Both those joys have been diminished by CD's. Liner notes, of course, are no longer on the back covers, but inside the flimsy booklets that are packaged in plastic jewel cases. You can't read them in the shop anymore, but that doesn't matter because there's not much to read. Printing a booklet is more complicated than printing a flat cover, and from a record company's point of view, the best booklets are those with the fewest pages. So now liner notes are generally shorter and less detailed than they used to be.
When more generous notes are offered, they are either in print so tiny as to be nearly useless to the naked eye, or in booklets too thick to fit properly under the plastic tabs on the jewel box cover. It's not just that liner notes are not being offered properly on CD; it's that the format militates against the possibility of proper notes.
In pop music, detailed notes are not such a big deal, but cover graphics are. Or were. During the LP era, rock bands lavished great inventiveness on their jacket art, and made it an important part of the record-listening experience. They still do, to a necessarily smaller degree. But I can't help but wonder, for example, whether the Beatles would have bothered making the ornate cover for "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" if the puny CD had been the dominant format in 1967.
There is something else that troubles me about the CD and its 10th anniversary celebration, and that's the realization that the LP died an unnatural and rather suspicious death. It was not consumer apathy that killed the format. Right now, fewer than 50 percent of American households are CD-equipped. Five years ago, when LP production had dwindled to a trickle, there were CD players in a mere 15 percent of American homes.
Recently, some of my doubts about the CD revolution were confirmed in an interview with Norio Ohga, the president of the Sony Corporation, and one of the fathers of the CD. Although the format was a collaboration between Sony and Philips, the Dutch electronics and recording concern, it was Mr. Ohga who determined the disk's length of about 75 minutes, arguing that it should be able to accommodate the Beethoven Ninth Symphony. After a discussion of Mr. Ohga's sideline career as a conductor, I asked him whether there was anything he missed about LP's. In his response, he did not dwell on the new format's sound quality or its convenience, but on Sony's need for something to sell.
"At the time we developed the compact disk," Mr. Ohga said, "the LP market was saturated, and the cassette market was beginning to slow down. We knew that we needed a new carrier. We reached an agreement with Philips on the details of the format, and we demonstrated it at a meeting of the International Music Committee, in Athens. At that time, there was no support from any other record company. In fact, they almost threw us out of Athens. They all thought that the LP was fine. But we introduced CD, and within five years, we had kicked the LP out of the industry."
Let us salute Sony, Philips and the record world on their marketing triumph, and let us enjoy the conveniences and other benefits of the decade-old CD format. But perhaps we should also sneak away from the celebration for a few moments, unpack a particularly treasured LP and give it a spin for old time's sake.
The rest of the music sounded like exotic soundtrack music; it was possible to extract visions of broad desert views and veiled women. From an Algerian like Mr. Boutella, one might have expected something less cliched.
Even the mosh pit at the front of the stage, coursing with male and female slam-dancing bodies, epitomized a kind of civility, a completely ritualized form of sweaty communalism, ecstatic and fun. Bodies sailed overhead, landing in the area between the audience and the stage, and the sailees would shake hands with the security men guarding the stage.  With its constant activity -- a stream of raw recruits made their way to the pit, stayed for a while, then left, covered with dust and mud -- the mosh pit offered the feel of an experience, but with no threat of violence or the effort of transgression. It was a ritual, and whether it's the result of growing up in suburbia or the general influence of political correctness, people seemed respectful of one another.
The music, mostly college rock, was surprisingly homogeneous for an alternative rock festival; there wasn't an iota of experimentation the entire day. And on a hot day, in the middle of a field, surrounded by lush mountains, even a group like Rage Against the Machine, which opened the event, seemed tame. The band put on a tough, precise set that mixed rap and hard rock, all drenched in politics.
As people found their way past the 28 food stands, the Forum Tent with its political displays and the 51 crafts stands, where everything from earrings and Guatemalan hats to posters of Eric Clapton and hemp fabric could be bought, the band's lead signer, Zack De La Rocha, dedicated a song to all the "Latinos and Latinas out there," of which there couldn't have been more than a handful. "We gotta take the power back," he chanted as people bought their Cajun food and lemonade.
While the main stage offered the bigger names, the second stage, off to the left, brought in performers who hadn't quite made it yet, groups on the verge of releasing major label debuts. Unrest, a band from Arlington, Va., offered an alternative to the alternative. Where the main stage had been all thrash and noise, Unrest put on a nicely minimalist show. The lead singer and guitarist, Mark Robinson, likes to use open strings, so the band's tunes, often based on falling and jumpy rhythms, felt open and airy; the band stretched out the pieces, jamming on them until the drone of the music became euphoric.
Tool came out next, and it drew a crowd, having a new record and an underground buzz behind it. The band, rough and raw, used riffs to make its way through tunes. Its lead singer, Maynard James Keenan, dressed in long johns, jerked around the stage. He sang "Intolerance," with lines like, "You lie, cheat, steal," while the band ground away at sweaty riffs.
Meanwhile, back at the main stage, Front 242, an industrial dance band, came out and performed dirty, electronic dance music that seemed like night music, odd to hear in the sunlight. People went crazy dancing and throwing themselves toward the stage. Fishbone came out and played "Freddy's Dead" over a hyper funk groove; it mixed ska and funk and noise, and the troops streamed to the pit, as bodies cartwheeled in the air over the audience. The pit, dusty and dry, sent up a column of dust.
Near the end of the show the fire department came and hosed down the crowd, and the water seemed like some sort of heavenly deliverance. Alice in Chains, which a good portion of the audience had been waiting for, came out and did songs from its album "Dirt," sludgy and thick. The band plays standard 1970's rock, but doctored and made unconventional by the lyrics, which went deeply into heroin addiction, with a little psychedelia thrown in.
When Alice in Chains left, so did much of the audience. Too bad, because Primus, the last act, offered some genuine eccentricity. Les Claypool, the band's leader, writes funny lyrics, and sings them in odd voices while snapping bass lines that form the core of the music. As people headed toward the exits, stepping around the sleeping bodies and piles of trash, Mr. Claypool sang, "My name is mud, not to be confused with Bill or Jack or Pete or Dennis."
Mr. Richards performs with his own band, the X-Pensive Winos. He formed the group about six years ago to take up the slack between occasional world tours and recording dates for the Rolling Stones, founded in the 1960's by, among others, himself and Mick Jagger. Like Mr. Jagger, Mr. Richards looks decidedly fiftyish, his facial wrinkles just this side of being wizened. But his music is as youthfully driving as ever. There are two Stones classics in this set, "Time Is on My Side" and "Gimme Shelter"; the rest are from solo Richards albums.
The "Center Stage" format is blessedly uncomplicated. The theatrical space is long and narrow. The stage is simply an unadorned performance area. The audience is sometimes seated, other times standing. The performers simply stroll on stage and begin playing. Patter with the audience is kept to a minimum. Viewers, however, get brief clips from formal interviews. Mr. Richards, for instance, says tonight that "probably I've written two songs in my life, and everything else is a variation on them." He also notes that he keenly appreciates the closeness afforded by playing in clubs and ballrooms and their equivalents. The Stones, he says, became too big for that kind of crucial experience.
In fact, music specials on television had reached something of a dead end. Too often the production was connected to a major event, either a world-wide benefit for some worthy cause or a superstar tour. Home Box Office, once quite active in this area, just about dropped music specials from its schedule. MTV signaled a turnaround with its "Unplugged" series and its emphasis on acoustic performances. Not all the electronic plugs were pulled, but the simplified format and the nonstudio sounds seem to bring fans and performers closer together.
Big names are obviously finding the new venues compatible. The "Center Stage" premiere several weeks ago starred Michael Bolton, who used the occasion to repair a gaffe he made when accepting a Grammy Award for "When a Man Loves a Woman" and failing to mention the classic recording by Percy Sledge. This time, a smoothly charming Mr. Bolton not only recognized Mr. Sledge but also brought him on stage to sing the number with him. More recently, Wynonna Judd demonstrated that her solo career after the retirement of her mother, Naomi, is entirely on track. Coming up in the next few weeks: Bruce Hornsby, Gloria Estefan, K. D. Lang.
So while an unsettling number of superstar stadium tours play to widening areas of empty seats, television music specials seem rejuvenated by bowing to the past. Both "Unplugged" and "Center Stage" have roots in a 1970's public-television series. Also out of Chicago, "Soundstage" was long produced by Ken Erlich, later in charge of the Grammy telecasts and, most recently, the splendid special "Aretha Franklin: Duet." The trick, it seems, is paying attention to the music, with as few frills and distractions as possible. Even if not always beautiful, small can be refreshing.  Center Stage PBS, tonight at 9 (Channel 13 in New York) Produced by Dick Carter and Michael A. Simon and directed by Mr. Simon. Line producer, Jamie Ceaser; associate producer, Stephanie Kahn; associate director, Karen McLaughlin; edited by Don DeMartini; scenic design by Michael Loewenstein. "Center Stage" is a production of WTTW/Chicago and VH-1.
One could have no complaints about the technical execution. The members of the quartet -- Peter Oundjian and Kikuei Ikeda, violinists; Kazuhide Isomura, violist, and Sadao Harada, cellist -- were obviously listening to one another's phrases, responding to accents and expressive gestures. There were also plenty of well-executed details; Brahms's inversions and dissections of his second-movement theme, for example, were thoroughly relaxed and poised.
But the professional sheen of the performances also worked against them. The playing encouraged passivity in a listener because it made the music so hard to follow. Everything was too smoothly displayed. The rhetoric in the Mozart work is full of Haydnesque playfulness and pointed escapades, but the players made it sound merely pleasing; startling moments passed by unnoticed. The interpretations seemed relatively unconcerned about the music's structural implications. Even in the less imposing Schumann work, Mr. Previn was merely dutiful in playing the skittish score: the performance was lacking in imagination and panache.
Moreover, though the players' uses of tempo and accent were neither overly rigid nor overly flexible, a listener often felt adrift, unable to feel the music's rhythmic foundation. These works, in their various ways, are preoccupied with downbeats and their undoing; they tease the listening ear. But it was often unclear from the Tokyo's style just when teasing was taking place; there was no frame of reference.
This was a very peculiar sensation. It wasn't as if the playing was full of rubato and bent tempos; it didn't suddenly speed up and slow down. It just became rhythmically hazy; the music was heard as if through a mist. This unintended uniformity was an unfortunate way of supporting the theme of this week's festival concerts: the similarities between Mozart and Brahms.
One would have to do some fast driving to catch both of the all-Vivaldi concerts next Saturday, but it is theoretically possible, since the Philharmonia Virtuosi's "Sunset Serenade" at Lyndhurst in Tarrytown begins at 6 o'clock while the Caramoor evening with the Orchestra of St. Luke's has an 8:30 curtain. Featured at Lyndhurst is "The Four Seasons," with Richard Kapp conducting and the concertmaster Paul Peabody as the featured soloist. The number to call for ticket information is 631-0046.
At Caramoor in Katonah there is a wider sampling of Vivaldi's concerto output, with six pieces in various instrumental configurations featuring the oboists Stephen Taylor and Melanie Feld, the violinists Eriko Sato, Mayuki Fukuhara and Krista Bennion Ferney, the cellist Myron Lutzke, the piccolo player Elizabeth Mann and the viola d'amore player Louise Schulman.
Members of the Orchestra of St. Luke's are busy again this week at Caramoor. Today at 5:30 P.M. the Chamber Ensemble plays Tchaikovsky's "Souvenir de Florence" and with Andre Previn as guest pianist, a Poulenc Trio and Beethoven's Quintet in E flat (Op. 16). On Thursday at 4:15 P.M. their recital ends with a Mozart divertimento, but leading up to it are three works in unusual chamber combinations, a sonata for two oboes, bassoon with continuo by the Baroque master Jan Dismas Zelenka, Arnold Bax's Trio for Flute, Viola and Harp and a quintet by Jean Francaix scored for flute, harp, violin, viola and cello.
Next Saturday the Orchestra of St. Luke's performs Mozart and Haydn under the direction of Mr. Previn, with two gifted young soloists making their Caramoor debuts: the soprano Lorraine Hunt, singing the Mozart concert aria "Ch'io mi scordi di te," and Wendy Warner, winner of a recent Avery Fisher Career Grant Award, playing the Haydn Cello Concerto No. 1 in C. For reservations to these concerts, the number to call is 232-1252.
Turning to music in a lighter vein, the Turning Point Coffeehouse, across the river in Piermont, is presenting the noted bluegrass and country fiddler Vassar Clements in back-to-back shows tonight at 6 and 9 o'clock. Tomorrow, it will be the pop-folk fusions of Taj Mahal at 7:30 and 10 P.M. For driving directions, the number to call is 359-1089.
The Summerjazz series continues at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers with an appearance on Friday at 8 P.M. by the blues singer-guitarist and Mount Vernon resident Ray Schinnery with his combo. Depending on the weather, the concert will be held outdoors in the courtyard or in the auditorium, but in either case, visitors should stop by the museum's exhibition titled "The Jazz Series," which contains paintings and works on paper "celebrating the spirit and history of jazz" by another Mount Vernon resident, Michael Singletary. For more information about these and other museum events, the number to call is 963-4550.
A classical-folk-popular musical mix is planned for the next-to-last program in the Untermyer Performing Arts Festival at the Untermyer Park in Yonkers, as the ensemble Alborada Latina traces the intertwining threads of American Indian, South Asian, African and European music in connection with popular and serious compositions in Latin America. In addition to traditional pieces, there will be folk or dance-influenced works by Alberto Ginastera of Argentina, Heitor Villa-Lobos of Brazil and Alejandro Garcia Caturla of Cuba.  There is no admission charge, and if it rains, the festivities will go forward in the Saunders School on Palmer Road.
Tanglewood is a frequent summer destination for Westchester music lovers, but programs in more intimate surroundings in the Berkshires in Massachusetts are offered at the Aston Magna Festival, which is celebrating its 21st summer in Great Barrington and the Mohawk Trail Concerts, up to season No. 24 in Charlemont.
Aston Magna, one of the pioneering ensembles in the so-called early music field -- using period instruments and historically apt performing practices -- focuses on rarely heard pre-Baroque chamber pieces next Saturday, with a concert performance of Handel's masque "Acis and Galatea" closing the season on Aug. 7. Both concerts start at 6 P.M. in St. James Episcopal Church of Great Barrington.
For tickets or travel directions, the number to call is (413) 528-3595. Aston Magna previews those programs at the Olin Auditorium of Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson on Fridays at 8 P.M. The number to call for information and reservations there is (914) 758-6822.
The Mohawk Trail programs are each given twice, on Fridays and Saturdays at 8 P.M. A few of the highlights are Rolf Schulte and Andrew Rangell playing Beethoven's "Kreutzer" Sonata this week, a cabaret evening with the duo of Joan Morris and William Bolcom on Aug. 6 and 7, the world premiere of Donald Wheelock's Sonata for Viola and Piano on Aug. 13 and 14 and the Schubert "Trout" Quintet on the final programs on Aug. 20 and 21. A schedule and other information can be got by calling (413) 625-9511.
MUSIC
Nonetheless, while he may no longer actively belong to the Beach Boys, the Beach Boys will always belong to him -- especially to the Brian Wilson who wrote, arranged and produced nearly every recording the band made from 1961 to 1967. The producers of this excellent retrospective (C2 07777-7-81294-2-4) -- the engineer Mark Linnet, the musician Andy Paley and the Beach Boys biographer David Leaf -- rightfully devote three of the set's five disks to the group's music in those first seven years.
Chronicled in fine detail here is the band's ascension to stardom as purveyors of the surf-rock genre they helped create ("Surfin' Safari," "Surfer Girl"), as well as their role as proselytizers of the era's high-spirited Southern California teen-age lifestyle ("Fun, Fun, Fun," "All Summer Long"). Their resourcefulness in the face of the British Invasion of 1964-65 is also properly underscored; unlike most of their pre-Beatles American peers, they not only managed to stay afloat but actually thrived amid the competition ("I Get Around," "Help Me Rhonda").
By the end of 1966, the Beach Boys were riding the crest of a wave that seemed like it would never break. The year began with the innovative "Pet Sounds" album and closed with the huge success of the single "Good Vibrations." But then came what's generally regarded as the group's great catastrophe: Brian Wilson's failed, intended masterpiece, "Smile," an unfinished work that sapped his energy and brought about a physical and artistic breakdown from which neither he nor the Beach Boys ever fully recovered.
For 26 years, "Smile" has maintained a near-mythic status as the most famous unreleased album in rock history. Conventional wisdom has it that if the record had been finished, it would have rivaled the Beatles' "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" and perhaps altered the path of pop music. But "Good Vibrations" may change that view. In addition to several more or less completed "Smile" tracks ("Cabinessence," "Our Prayer" and "Surf's Up") that ultimately surfaced on later Beach Boys albums, "Good Vibrations" offers more than a half-hour of previously unreleased polished, semipolished and unpolished fragments of "Smile" music. Based on the evidence here, one is forced to confront the fact that it's probably time, once and for all, to give up the ghost on this great album that never was.
With "Smile," Brian Wilson tried to merge the eclectic rock-pop-classical amalgams he had perfected on such "Pet Sounds" songs as "Wouldn't It Be Nice," "You Still Believe in Me" and "God Only Knows" with the daringly experimental production techniques of "Good Vibrations," his self-described "pocket symphony." The result was to be a whole new soundscape for modern music. Meanwhile, the lyrics -- by Mr. Wilson's "Smile" collaborator, Van Dyke Parks -- tried to address themes ranging from American history to man's innate spiritualism. In other words, "Smile" was to be an album about everything.
Obviously, that's a formidable puzzle for any artist, let alone a perfectionist like Mr. Wilson. What one mostly hears in the "Smile" music is an unfocused, confounding sifting of ideas: a track called "Heroes and Villains (Sections)," for example, features a chorus arranged for, alternately, a cappella doo-wop, harpsichord, string quartet, harmonica and French horn. Any of them might have worked; none of them made it to later versions of the song.
And even on those rare occasions when the ideas seem to coalesce, as on the pastoral tone poem "Cabinessence," the results are not particularly evocative. In fact, they're oddly hermetic, due in large part to Mr. Parks's deliberately oblique lyrics. Lines like "Over and over, the crow cries, 'Uncover the cornfield,' " and images like "Columnated ruins domino" in "Surf's Up" might have displayed a heady, impressionistic bent that Mr. Wilson found intellectually intriguing, but they only serve to hold even the most dedicated listener at arm's length.
At best, one surmises, the completed "Smile" would have been an album to respect and even admire -- but probably only from afar. And, as so many of the songs on "Good Vibrations" demonstrate, what Brian Wilson and his angel-voiced messengers, the Beach Boys, have given us over these many years is timeless music that keeps "touching our hearts" (in the words of the 1971 song "Add Some Music"). So let's celebrate "In My Room" and "When I Grow Up" and "She Knows Me Too Well" and "This Whole World" and "Marcella" and all those other still-glowing moments and turn the last page on the "Smile" story, when Brian Wilson, rock-and-roll's Icarus, flew too close to that warm California sun.
RECORDINGS VIEW Billy Altman writes about pop music for People and Rolling Stone.
Although some have appeared haphazardly on LP or CD, others have not been available since the days of 78's. During World War II, Telefunken, as Teldec was then called, moved its recording studios and archives to basement vaults in the Singakademie in Berlin, to guard against Allied attack. After 1943, when the building burned, the priceless recording matrices were stowed in coal mines, presumably to be rescued after the war. They nearly all disappeared.
The only way to guess what the vaults once held was through surviving copies of Telefunken's original contracts. Teldec reconstituted the archives by recording from shellac 78's owned by collectors. It is impossible to judge the condition of those disks, since they have all been processed by a new system, Cedar (Computer Enhanced Digital Audio Restoration). The system seems inconsistent and often synthetic; the unprocessed noise of historical wear might well have been preferable. But the performances are still audible through the scrims dropped by time and technology.
Here, for the first time since early LP days, is a 1941 performance of Strauss's "Heldenleben" with the Concertgebouw Orchestra led by Mengelberg. Despite the cramped acoustic and muddied textures, this is one of the work's most authoritative recordings. The tenderness of the playing makes the music's eccentricities and banalities completely comprehensible, even moving. Rubato and portamento are applied freely; downbeats are used for propulsion rather than accent. Each phrase shows an ear for character.
The performance style is almost a century old: Mengelberg became music director of the Concertgebouw Orchestra in 1895, at age 24, and quickly established himself as a consummate Straussian. The composer dedicated "Ein Heldenleben" to him and his orchestra; for nearly a half-century, Mengelberg led every Concertgebouw performance of the work except the one led by Strauss himself, in 1907.
This performance is typical of the musical wealth documented by Telefunken. The first recordings ever made at Bayreuth, in 1936 (excerpts from Wagner's "Lohengrin," "Walkure" and "Siegfried"), remind one how singers like Max Lorenz and Franz Volker naturally combined lyric declamation and dramatic proclamation. The young Jochum, leading the Berlin Philharmonic in the mid-30's, reveals the muscular exuberance to be found in Beethoven's "Eroica" Symphony and Wagner's "Tannhauser" Overture.
There is, in fact, no uniform style evident in these releases. Paired with Stravinsky's overdeliberate conducting of the Berlin Philharmonic in "Jeu de Cartes," from 1938, is Paul Hindemith's lean, architectonic conducting of the same orchestra in his "Mathis der Maler" Symphony, from 1934 (just before his American exile). The styles encompass Furtwangler's idiosyncratic intensity, heard in works by Beethoven and Bruckner, as well as Kleiber's gracious Classicism in Schubert's "Unfinished" Symphony. Michelangeli's limpid, eloquent performance of the Grieg Piano Concerto contrasts intriguingly with Kulenkampff's wiry violin virtuosity in Beethoven and Bruch concertos. Fascism could also boast the robust Verdi of Mariano Stabile ("Falstaff") and Aureliano Pertile ("Otello"), two Toscanini proteges at La Scala who chose not to follow the Maestro into exile and dissent.
There are some postwar classics in these releases as well: Hans Knappertsbusch's renowned "Parsifal" from the first de-Nazified Bayreuth Festival after the war, in 1951, and a vigorous Schubert Ninth Symphony from the same year, led by Clemens Krauss. But these performances are closely related to the older ones. They represent musical achievements that have never been surpassed in insight and accomplishment. The performances speak with a natural ease that derived from a supreme confidence in the Germanic (and Italianate) musical traditions, a confidence unqualified and unmodified by the swirl of events. And though Karl Bohm and Herbert von Karajan preserved that confidence in later years, it could never be as influential.
These performances remind us of a scar that cuts through the history of classical-music performance in this century. Much of the Central European tradition was dispersed, mainly to the United States (with an influence that is now increasingly difficult to feel). These recordings also hint at what might have been if that European world had continued to evolve without the distortions of fascism; through the swish and hiss can be heard the highest artistic achievements of a morally bankrupt culture.  CLASSICAL VIEW
Like most of Jazz at Lincoln Center's shows, this one came with an ideological background. Jazz, from the 1960's on, lost a common language of expression, a musical terrain where performers of all generations could come and improvise. The compositions performed -- "Cherokee," "Eternal Triangle" (which uses the chord changes for "I Got Rhythm"), "How High the Moon" and the blues form -- are all jazz standards, which, it can be argued, should be the basis of a young jazz musician's repertory. And using a fixed set of rules, along with fixed repertory, allows for improvisational play on neutral grounds, making the witty and bravura manipulation of the material that much more evident.
On Friday night, youth was not only served, but it also served the heads of its elders. Mr. Coleman, who can be a formidable saxophonist, barely played at all, his lines occasionally pungent with odd harmonies, but mostly lumpy with cliches. And Mr. Murray, who spent the show playing the form of tunes but not their harmonies, came across as the guy who decided that the rules weren't interesting, and faced the opposing pitcher not with a bat, but with a machine gun.
Which left the first half of the concert to Mr. Redman, who is 24, and Mr. Braden, 31. The best boxing matches are between equals with different styles, and Mr. Redman and Mr. Braden, both brilliant and assured saxophonists, slugged it out, but with opposing strategies. Mr. Redman, on solo after solo, constructed articulate, perfectly balanced improvisations out of quotes and references. Blues ideas, be-bop lines, melodies and runs all appeared in quotes, all put together with a real sense of creative joy. He ran away with the crowd, which gave him a standing ovation for his set piece, the ballad "Angel Eyes."
Mr. Braden, who's barely known even inside the jazz community, was extraordinary, but in a more subtle way. All jazz musicians make harmonic decisions, which become a personal style; Mr. Braden's sound on the chords let bitterness rustle through the sound of pleasure, and his rhythmic sense was often astounding in the deliberation of its play, the pleasure he took in elaboration. And of the two, Mr. Braden had the largest sound, hard without being obvious; like Mr. Redman, Mr. Braden's narratives flowed, always self-analyzing and never careless, even in the most heated contexts.
The second half of the three-and-a-half-hour concert featured the trumpeters Red Rodney, Wynton Marsalis, Nicholas Payton, Wallace Roney and Roy Hargrove, along with the same seemingly tireless and impartial rhythm section of John Hicks on piano, Chris McBride on bass and Herlin Riley on drums, that had performed during the first half. Like the first part of the concert, the second served as a forum for introducing young musicians. On an opening slow blues, Mr. Payton, 20, delivered an ultimatum by blasting a minimalist improvisation, using broad and singing notes that declared music school virtuosity dead. He was followed by Mr. Roney, who looked uncomfortable, like he was walking into a trap, and was aware of it; his solo, mathematical and cold, and laden with runs, was exactly what Mr. Payton had been warning about.
Part of the way through the second half, Mr. Payton teamed up with Mr. Hargrove on "Just Friends," and on the exchanges ending the tune, a titanic battle shaped up, with Mr. Payton moving into the upper register with hammered high notes that seemed intent on obliterating an opponent. Mr. Hargrove, a canny, beautifully balanced improviser, matched left hook with left hook, and added a flurry of combinations afterward, as if to say power had its place, but power with a bit of flexibility and humor always wins.
"Xerxes" has an impossibly twisted plot. The young King Xerxes is in love with Romilda. But Romilda is in love with Xerxes's brother Arsamene, who returns the feelings. Xerxes himself is betrothed to Amastre, who arrives disguised as a soldier only to hear that she has been forsaken. And Romilda's sister Atalanta covets Arsamene. Backstairs scheming, misdirected letters and the efforts of Ariodate (Romilda's father) and Elviro (Arsamene's servant) first put all asunder and then set everything right.
It makes great sense to stage a work of this kind in English. Steven Wadsworth, who directed the production, provided his own translation, with additional material by Carol Borah Palca. Mr. Wadsworth's text was often freewheeling, and there were times when he took questionable liberties for the sake of keeping the audience laughing. But overall, his rhymed and eminently singable text conveyed the spirit of the Italian original. And his thoughtful direction turned the text's repetitiveness into an advantage. Arias were not merely sung, but were staged in ways that drew different nuances from every repeated verse.
Mr. Wadsworth also transported the story from Xerxes' Persia, circa 470 B.C., to Handel's 18th-century England; but since the plot has nothing to do with the historical Xerxes, that hardly mattered. The production, designed by Thomas Lynch, used a single set, the exterior of a modest country house. But the staging's precise detail -- from Martin Pakledinaz's period costumes, to the candlelit, wallpapered rooms glimpsed through the windows and the servants occupied with mundane chores -- made up for the lack of scene changes.
There were no real deficits in the casting, musically or dramatically. At times, Miss von Stade's Xerxes edged dangerously close to her Cherubino; but if she overplayed the king's youthful, lovelorn side, she portrayed his vulnerabilities with a winning sympathy.
Dawn Upshaw was a joy as Romilda. She moved through Handel's ornate writing with incomparable ease. Her coloration invariably matched the demands of the text, and her supple performance proved again that she is a superb comic actress.
Arsamene was played by Brian Asawa, a countertenor who made an indelible impression at the Metropolitan Opera National Council Auditions winners concert a few seasons ago. Few countertenors produce a timbre as beautiful, as fully supported or as consistently well-projected as Mr. Asawa's, and his portrayal was as dramatically sensitive as it was firmly sung.
In the smaller roles, Mimi Lerner was a strong, touching Amastre. Erie Mills's model for Atalanta must have been Gracie Allen: she seemed ditsy rather than scheming, and she sang her music smoothly. George Hogan and Kevin Langan gave solid, comic performances as Elviro and Ariodate. Now and then some of the ornamentation went slightly awry, but for the most part the singers handled the decorative writing expertly. They were supported by generally fine playing from an orchestra of mostly modern instruments, with recorders, a lute and a harpsichord adding a hint of period flavor. Kenneth Montgomery was the conductor and kept things moving at a comfortable pace.
The Strauss operas have always been favorites of John Crosby, the company's founder and general director. Of the composer's 15 operas, the company has staged all but "Guntram" and "Die Frau ohne Schatten." The new "Capriccio," in an English translation by Maria Massey Pelikan, does not move the company closer to completing the series. But it is a ravishing score, and on Friday evening Mr. Crosby conducted a performance that illuminated many of its strengths as well as its principal weakness, a lack of economy.
But perhaps economy was not the order of the day. "Capriccio" was Strauss's last opera, and in turning down further projects, he described it as his "one testament." It is, after all, a treatise on opera itself. Using the story of an 18th-century French countess and her two suitors, the poet Olivier and the composer Flamand, Strauss explores (inconclusively) the question of whether words or music are more expressive. But the listener never cares much who wins the Countess. The artistic discussion is always the focus.
This abstract quality of the work is reflected fully in the production. Wolfgang Gussmann suggests the 18th-century setting with period furniture and costumes. But all the costumes and furniture are stark white, and they are set in a room with deep blue walls, devoid of detail. It is as if the characters and their debates are like fleeting clouds in an azure sky.
Sheri Greenawald was undaunted by the high tessitura of the Countess's music, and her portrayal fully captured the assurance with which the Countess controls her milieu. But Miss Greenawald was not entirely successful in making the text understood, a significant flaw in this wordy, philosophical work.
Mark Thomsen and James Michael McGuire gave vocally solid, dramatically sympathetic portrayals of Flamand and Olivier. Eric Halfvarson's La Roche came to life compellingly in his free-ranging discourse on the nature of art. Richard Stilwell's dry-voiced Count was passable, and Katherine Ciesinski's sultry portrayal of Clairon was a worthy contribution. Generally, though, the singers, like the characters they portrayed, commanded the attention less fully than the issues they sang about. Strauss probably would have found that pleasing.
Mr. Westerberg learned well from 1960's and 70's rock: melodies fit for the Beatles, guitar twang and drive from the Rolling Stones, earnest romance and sympathy for losers worthy of Bruce Springsteen, raucous energy out of punk-rock. His lyrics pin down emotions, from affection to resignation to defiance, with basic language; his raw-throated singing makes every word sound heartfelt. Alternative-rock luminaries from Soul Asylum to Dinosaur Jr. owe a lot to Mr. Westerberg's songs and to his sincere but self-mocking attitude.
The Replacements were a beloved cult band, famously erratic: one night they'd rock with headlong momentum and intensity, the next they would be drunkenly inept. Mr. Westerberg's new band (David Minehan on guitar, Darren Hill on bass, Josh Freese on drums) retains the Replacements' format and just about lives up to the fondest memories of the old band. Knowing how much they have to prove and laughing it off, they exult in the lean riffs and steady crunch of the songs.
Leading a band he can depend on, Mr. Westerberg still has an anarchic streak; during "Swingin' Party," he suddenly reached over to de-tune Mr. Minehan's guitar, and part way through "Knockin' on Mine" he broke most of the strings on his own guitar. But he didn't throw away the songs; he has realized that spunk doesn't require self-destruction.
Grant Lee Buffalo opened the show with louder, less effective rock blasts. Grant Lee Phillips, the trio's songwriter and singer, strummed an amplified 12-string guitar and sang with such fervor that he finished songs out of breath. But the band's pounding insistence buried Mr. Phillips's smart, free-associative lyrics, which, on the album "Fuzzy" (Slash/Warner Brothers), land him somewhere between Peter Case and Robyn Hitchcock. The simplistic noise left listeners wondering why Mr. Phillips was so worked up.
But just as the special relationship in politics often engenders anxiety among the British, similarly the trans-Atlantic traffic in pop is fraught with rivalry and resentment. Right now, the British pop scene is convulsed by one of its periodic fits of anti-Americanism. All year long, there have been murmurings of discontent, which has swelled into a "Yanks go home!" uproar, in reaction to the deluge of music from Seattle grunge bands.
From the late 80's until quite recently, British indie bands had looked to American hard-core and alternative rock, envying and admiring the likes of Sonic Youth and Big Black. American underground bands seem to have an un-self-conscious and intuitive approach that was felt to be preferable to England's traditionally overtheorized and premeditated take on rock-and-roll. The best British bands of the late 80's, like My Bloody Valentine, took the slacker spirit and neo-psychedelic sound of Dinosaur Jr. and Husker Du, giving them an androgynous spin.
The explosive success of Nirvana changed everything. What was once cool and a trifle exotic became commonplace, oppressive. Even more resented are the home-grown plague of slacker-wannabes who've struggled to emulate the invaders, growing their hair shaggy, mumbling their lyrics, grunging up their guitars. As 1992 turned into 1993, a wave of bands emerged that reject the notion of an "English curse" (of pretentiousness and preciousness) and instead embrace the idea of being literate, self-conscious, stylized and ironic. The most successful and most volubly anti-American of the new patriots is Suede. The band is currently trying to conquer America with its first full-scale tour, which reaches New York on Sept. 18.
Suede's roots are the British art-rock and the glam of the 70's (David Bowie, T. Rex, Kate Bush) and the English nostalgia of the Smiths. Its front man, Brett Anderson, sings in an exaggerated London accent, a defiant gesture against a pseudo-American slacker drawl that so many British bands still mimic. His fey, flamboyant image and gender-bending lyrics are a resurrection of the English tradition of sexual ambiguity, a concerted reaction against grunge's machismo.
Other bands flying the flag for the imperiled legacy of English pop include Denim, Pulp, the Auteurs and Saint Etienne. The Auteurs herald a return to wordy songcraft. The group's singer Luke Haines worships what he calls the "wryness and dryness" of quintessentially English songwriters like Ray Davies of the Kinks. The band's debut album, "New Wave," released in America last spring by Caroline, even contained an anti-grunge anthem called "American Guitars." Saint Etienne is a stylish dance pop trio whose delightful, irony-drenched songs with titles like "London Belongs to Me" and "Avenue" often seem like reinvocations of 60's London.
The anti-American mood was prefigured by that most England-obsessed singer, Morrissey, formerly of the Smiths. On his 1992 glam-rock-tinged LP, "Your Arsenal," the song "We'll Let You Know" mourned the fact that "we look to Los Angeles for the language we use . . . London is dead." He also incited controversy when he draped himself in the Union Jack during a performance.
If there's a sociological backdrop to this mini-movement of bands that are proud to be British, it's that England is in the throes of political, social and cultural crisis. Economic recession, rising crime and the deterioration of public service have all fueled unease about where Britain is heading as a nation, and what it means to be British. On the one hand, Britons are nervous about merging with their neighbors on the Continent in a greater European Community; on the other, they feel inundated with American culture, from grunge to Hollywood blockbusters to television shows like "American Gladiators."
THE DEFIANT ENGLISHNESS OF this new crop of indie bands is a sort of perversely parochial response to global pop culture -- everything from Nintendo to sample-based music like techno (a truly international and rootless music). Since the future would seem to promise the loss of national cultural identity, these bands turn their backs to the future and rifle the back pages of England's pop glory.
This trans-Atlantic antagonism often cuts the other way, too: there's a long tradition of American skepticism toward the latest British trends. For some, Britain produces an endless stream of overhyped "haircut bands" that are seen as videogenic and weighted with conceptual baggage withoutmusical substance. Suede, for instance, has received a mixed reaction in America. While the college rock audience, which has always been Anglophile, has responded favorably, indie hipsters remain skeptical.
American critics have often suggested that the British lack a natural, "organic" relationship with rock-and-roll. There's an Anglophobic tradition that stretches from the critic Dave Marsh, who in the early 80's celebrated Bruce Springsteen's all-American populism while decrying the British New Pop invaders like Culture Club and Human League, to Joe Carducci's recent, influential polemic, "Rock and Pop Narcotic." In his Anglophobic theory of rock, Mr. Carducci argues that British bands quickly lost touch with the blues roots of rock-and-roll, and after Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath, they made little contribution to the evolution of the form.
In recent years, only a handful of Britons have been given the critical red carpet in America. One is Teen-Age Fan Club, an Americanophile Scottish quartet that is influenced by the likes of Neil Young and Big Star. Another is My Bloody Valentine, which also initially took its bearings from American underground bands like Sonic Youth before radically transforming its sources.
The trans-Atlantic traffic in musical ideas often works by a process of innovation through misrecognition. This syndrome of unsuccessful imitation leads to all manner of ironic developments, like the way the northern English band the Fall has suddenly and inexplicably emerged as a major influence on a breed of lo-fi indie bands in America like Pavement. In a similar fashion, the Sex Pistols have been adopted by American metal bands, with everyone from Guns 'n' Roses to Megadeth to Motley Crue remaking their songs.
Misappropriation and miscegenation is the way that pop evolves. In view of this, the attempts of bands like Suede and the Auteurs to safeguard the purity of English pop seem shortsighted and futile. Insularity and inbreeding may ultimately condemn British pop to extinction.  POP VIEW Simon Reynolds is the author of "Blissed Out: The Raptures of Rock."
The impetus for Mr. Brant's postwar sequence of spatially organized works came from Ives, who sketched but never completed a "Universe Symphony" for separated orchestras. Ivesian multiplicity, both spatial and stylistic, inspired such pieces as "Orbits" for 80 trombones, "Fire in the Amstel" for 100 flutes and the gigantic "Prisons of the Mind" for 314 orchestral players.
The music at Monday's concert was far more intimate: "Fourscore (1913-1993)," a sequence of four string quartets. As one might expect, it's not so simple as two violins, a viola and a cello. Mr. Brant, seeking a perfect balance of timbres, has replaced the second violin with an instrument he names "tenor-cello," a cello restrung and tuned up a fifth. He has also allotted a cameo fifth part to a "mezzo-violin," a small viola retuned as a violin. The two cellos are at the corners of the front of the stage, the violin and viola in the balcony to the back, the mezzo-violin off to the side of the audience.
The four pieces, dedicated in turn to Cowell, Antheil, Carl Ruggles and Varese, had various elements in common: atmospheric block chords, jagged antiphonal passages, multi-layered writing in alternative tunings, brief bursts of lyricism. The mezzo-violin had elegiac solos at the beginning and end of each work. The third quartet was particularly strong on glissandos, with a sinuous chantlike melody unfolding over a spectral background of swooping voices. The fourth incorporated an affecting quotation from the Cavatina of Beethoven's Quartet No. 13. At the end, there is a final solo lament over a magical haze of open strings.
Janet Brady and Jennifer Ruening Myers (violinists), Michael Finckel and Stephen Stalker (cellists) and George Myers (violist), all musicians associated with the Catskill Conservatory, played the pieces with assurance and eloquence, easily mastering the considerable technical challenges. It was a handsome gesture toward a true American original.
Canterbury rock wasn't showy or bombastic enough to compete commercially with the music that eventually gave progressive rock a bad name. It's still prized by a dedicated but minuscule following, although it has had an influence on composers like Geri Allen and groups like No Safety. Many of Mr. Sinclair's old bands' albums have recently been reissued on CD's. Mr. Sinclair remains loyal to the style and continues to collaborate with fellow Canterburyites, including Pip Pyle and David Sinclair (from Hatfield and the North) and Hugh Hopper (from Soft Machine).
At Fez, Mr. Sinclair interspersed songs from his current band, Caravan of Dreams, with 1970's obscurities from the Hatfield catalogue and from Canterbury colleagues like Robert Wyatt and Phil Miller. He accompanied himself on electric guitar, acoustic guitar or electric bass, filling in missing band parts by scat-singing, whistling or buzzing his lips like a trombone. His own lyrics are a little more prosaic, and less light headed, than those by Mr. Hopper or Mr. Pyle. But the unguarded tone and the relaxed whimsy of the songs pointed toward a bucolic idea of rock that may have slipped deep underground but, luckily, hasn't disappeared.
And, in fact, a sense of normalcy was achieved, for both bad and good.
In the first half of the concert, it was possible to hear the least pleasant sort of routine, in which the soloist, Itzhak Perlman, presented a virtuosic performance of the Beethoven Violin Concerto that sounded as if he was completely unsurprised by the music and its peculiarities.
Mr. Perlman was always taking pleasure in the music (and he obviously returned some to much of the audience, which gave him a standing ovation), but I found his occasional mannerisms distracting (slides at the end of long intervallic leaps, for example), and his unremitting, plain-speaking elegance unconvincing; this score is grittier, more robust, less pleasing than this performance suggested. The orchestra, which preceded the concerto with Beethoven's Overture to "Fidelio," was also playing at its most unexceptional. It actually sounded wan and unsteady in exposed passages, as if Mr. Masur had almost taken the piece for granted.
But in the second half of the concert, it was possible to hear the orchestra, confidently under the control of its music director, playing with commitment and refinement. Their vigorous performance of the First Symphony of Shostakovich was a more typical example of what Mr. Masur has achieved with the orchestra since his tenure began.
Particularly in the first two movements, Mr. Masur captured the almost frighteningly weird energy in this piece, completed in 1925, when the composer was just 19. The music is mercurial, almost completely without any sort of emotional consistency. There are sudden shifts between lilting elegance and macabre exclamation. Solo instruments, including a piano in the second and fourth movements, often emerge unexpectedly after the most raucous of orchestral exclamations. The score's mixture of irony and fantasy recalls Stravinsky's "Firebird" and "Histoire du Soldat," along with the enthusiastic orchestration of Rimsky-Korsakov.
It is almost impossible to pin this piece down; it resists a single perspective. Some passages loom incredibly large and others seem exaggeratedly small, through techniques that served the composer well in his later political works. Mr. Masur maintained the sense of multiple focus through much of the piece. The third movement, which turns sincere, almost seemed to distract his concentration, although by the time Shostakovich's wit was in place for the finale, so were the orchestra's clean attacks and warm sound.
This concert is meant to be part of a continuing project by Mr. Masur in coming seasons, establishing "a general, broad-based correlation between the major orchestra works" of Beethoven and Shostakovich. Tonight, the regular subscription concerts begin, pairing Beethoven's First Symphony with Shostakovich's. Another program, in February, will pair Shostakovich's Symphony No. 7 with "Wellington's Victory," by Beethoven.
Mr. Masur sees the two composers as joint fighters for the cause of humanism, but if he could focus the project with the same energy he brought to this Shostakovich performance, more musical connections might be heard as well: a classical tautness of construction in service to often shocking and extreme statements, a love for almost rude jests that are all the more effective because of the subtle intellect at work, a mixture of bombast and elegy.
The only problem is that Mr. Masur is scheduling his Shostakovich performances too far apart for them to have a cumulative impact. Given his obvious love for this music, a concentrated Shostakovich cycle might make a powerful case for this popular but still fresh repertory by one of this century's geniuses: a routine one might wish for.
The Chicago Symphony has made many fine recordings of the works of Bartok, and this ranks with the best. The "Cantata Profana," subtitled "The Nine Splendid Stags," is an allegory, rich and strange, based on a Romanian ballad about growing up and leaving the nest. It is rarely performed, mostly because of the difficult parts for tenor and chorus, but John Aler and the Chicago Symphony Chorus sing admirably.
"The Wooden Prince," one of the century's most original ballet scores, also has a strong folk flavor. Pierre Boulez has the ideal musical temperament to blend that element of the score with its heavily written, almost cerebral aspect. As one might expect from him, the interpretation is well pointed, and the dynamic markings are scrupulously observed, yet the overall effect is at once more sensitive and more engaging than in his old CBS recording of the ballet, with the New York Philharmonic.
The sound is brilliant and thrillingly immediate but well balanced. JAMIE JAMES
"Hand on the Pump" and "How I Could Just Kill a Man" (a careful justification for killing in self-defense) were the most popular songs on the group's debut album, "Cypress Hill." So it brought the same subject matter to its new album, "Black Sunday" (both disks on Ruffhouse/Columbia), which entered the Billboard album chart at No. 1 and remains in the Top 10.
Cypress Hill's fictional universe offers a pitched battle between the trigger-happy group and everyone else; now, in "Hand on the Glock," "self-defense turns to the offense." Talking about a curbside disagreement in "Ain't Goin' Out Like That," B-Real vows, "I'll huff and puff and blow your head off." It's gangster rap veiled in reefer smoke and treated with all the gravity of a cartoon. At one point, B-Real describes himself as "comin' out blasting like Yosemite Sam."
Cypress Hill knows how to pace a show; B-Real and his two sidekicks, Sen Dog (Senen Reyes) and D. J. Muggs (Larry Muggerud), stalked the stage with casual authority, and the backup tracks by D. J. Muggs were lean enough to sound clear on a club sound system. While Cypress Hill drew applause for every marijuana reference, the group might seem a little less amusing if, instead of N.O.R.M.L., it was plugging the National Rifle Association.
The tour should lay to rest any lingering notions that hip-hop is confined to ghetto performers and audiences; Cypress Hill drew a mixed, largely white crowd that was ready to mosh. The group headlined a quintuple bill of rappers of various backgrounds: Mexican, Cuban and Italian (Cypress Hill), Irish (House of Pain), Mexican and American Indian (Funkdoobiest), Puerto Rican (Fatal) and Beverly Hills High School (Whooliganz). Most of the music was associated with Cypress Hill's Soul Assassins production team; it revolved around leisurely bass lines and siren noises, topped with a variety of attitudes.
House of Pain has taken up slow, boasting old-school rap with the same eager clumsiness that 1960's British rockers brought to 1950's Chicago blues. In a set including material from its next album, House of Pain made efforts to vary its style, including one rap to heavy-metal power chords. But its hit, "Jump Around," remains its best song by far.
Funkdoobiest could be Cypress Hill Jr., also praising marijuana and promising mayhem in its boasts; the group was forceful but less than original, especially in a blatant lift from George Clinton's "Atomic Dog." Two opening acts performed for 10 minutes each. Whooliganz, two 15-year-old rappers, tried to position themselves as a prankish latter-day Beastie Boys; Fatal rapped about psychotic violence, citing Jeffrey Dahmer and Charles Manson. Both need practice to make their poses seem natural.
Surf music is the product of rootlessness, and sounds like it: deracinated, lacking the clear jazz, blues or country antecedents of most popular music. It sounds simply American, optimistic and fun. Mr. Dale, who is 56, has a rough sort of charisma, and he's a virtuoso, flinging riffs and silvery, chiming solos around the tunes. But after 30 minutes, his music reveals itself as a formula and the fun becomes incessant, stuck in a narrow, innocent groove, one tiny, limited piece of the American picture. PETER WATROUS
Mr. Craft, Stravinsky's longtime assistant, was the conductor and presumably the guiding spirit of the program, and it was tempting to think that the dreadful presentation of "Pierrot" was intended to bring Schoenberg down a peg. Suffice it to say that by contrast, the companion production of Stravinsky's "Histoire" was at least not embarrassing.
In fact, the performance was often excellent in the individual lines spun out by instrumentalists, notably Rolf Schulte, violinist; John Feeney, bassist; William Blount, clarinetist; Chris Gecker, trumpeter, and Gordon Gottlieb, percussionist. Ensemble textures were sometimes murky, and Elliott Forrest delivered the Soldier's text in colorless singsong fashion. Paul Hecht produced some sparks as the Narrator and the Devil.
Thomas Gruenewald applied light stage direction here, but turned a grossly heavy hand to "Pierrot." In view of Schoenberg's instructions for this wonderfully mysterious creation -- "the performers at no time have the task of shaping the mood and character of the individual pieces according to the meaning of the words, but rather according to the music" -- the mincing and mugging with which Marni Nixon delivered the Sprechstimme could only be called perverse.
While supposedly immersed in the "drama," Ms. Nixon read intently from the score and often hung on Mr. Craft's every rigid beat. She scattered score pages on the floor as she finished them, so that, increasingly, in her peregrinations she was trampling on Schoenberg's music: superb but no doubt unintended symbolism. JAMES R. OESTREICH
The evening was resplendent with Mr. Vandross's singing. He sometimes played phrases straight, letting the easy sensuality of his voice make words ring with meaning. At other times he would twist a word like "yeah!" into a seemingly endless string of melismatic vowels. A word, when Mr. Vandross improvises, becomes a sentence. Occasionally he used an electronic delay to add an echo to his voice; that pointed out how dependent the music was on sumptuousness, a form of extravagance that amplified the smallest luxury.
Mr. Vandross exuded refined excess, not only in his virtuosity, but also in the compressed intensity of his emotions. The sound, thick wads of harmonized voices and orchestral backings, underscored the desired richness of experience. The words themselves were inflated; on "Never Too Much" he sang "a million days in your arms is never enough," and made it seem plausible.
The female vocal group En Vogue opened the show with a set that never quite caught on; the crowd was there for Mr. Vandross. The group can sing, and on a tune like "Give It Up and Turn It Loose," the voices of its four members pierced the clutter of the rhythm section. En Vogue was selling music filled with a sense of humor and competition; they even pulled a man out of the audience to sing to and fight over, one of the oldest pop tricks in the book.
But then came Mr. Vandross, along with his band and sequined backup singers, marching through their choreography and heading directly into deep emotional territory.
Mr. Rorem's confession raised interesting if distracting questions. If a composer admires a poem's imagery but does not believe in its message, can he set it persuasively? Does a composer's attitude toward a text matter if he applies his full professional arsenal to his task? And when a composer accepts a commission for a work he doesn't believe in, is the result likely to be professionalism or hack work?
Mr. Rorem's answers to these questions are in the works themselves, offered in generally polished, sweet-toned readings by the New York Virtuoso Singers, conducted by Harold Rosenbaum. In a few cases, doubts were confirmed: "Arise, Shine" (1977) and parts of "Mercy and Truth Are Met" (1982) and of "A Sermon on Miracles" (1947) have a square-cornered, utilitarian, anonymous quality. But other pieces reach higher. A Te Deum (1987), with organ and brass accompaniment, is full of color and sensitivity to the text. "God Is Gone Up" (1986), "Truth in the Night Season" (1966) and Three Motets (1973) are beautifully harmonized, vibrant settings. And "Praises for the Nativity" (1970) intertwines Latin and English texts in an inventive counterpoint.
Still, the most affecting works on the program were the two secular pieces. "Love Alone" (1988), for male voices, renders Paul Monette's poem about a friend's death from AIDS with eloquence and directness. And "Give All to Love," turns the Emerson poem into a dialogue between unison male voices and unison female voices.
Walter Hilse provided energetic organ accompaniments to several of the works, and Mr. Rorem supported the group at the piano in two of them. ALLAN KOZINN
Aram Khachaturian, who would have been 90 years old this year, was remembered on Thursday with an all-Khachaturian program played by Sahan Arzruni and two guests. Despite the composer's ups and downs with Soviet bureacracy, he offered his Government a shining prototype for its cultural policies: ethnic music taken from the people, transformed into concert form and returned to the people as cultural artifact.
Khachaturian chipped at the edges of traditional harmony, but in the end it was his tool for incorporating the modal and melismatic style of Armenian melody. Indeed, the Vocalise for piano, written in 1978, the composer's last year, was as smoothly welcoming to the ear as the familiar Toccata and the expansive "Poem" written roughly 50 years earlier. Seven Preludes and Fugues for piano represented Khachaturian's multitonal and not always satisfactory experiments in intellectual rigor.
Ani Kavafian had fine solo moments in the difficult Sonata for Violin and Piano. Charles Neidich played a sweetly modest clarinet transcription of the Nocturne. But it was the Trio that truly captured the evening. The violin and clarinet sonorities were bracing and beautiful.
Mr. Arzruni burst everywhere with grand enthusiasms, a tendency his facility at high speeds could indulge. Indeed, the finale of the Piano Sonata (1961) was a kind of dual confession: Khachaturian admitting his weakness for pointless complication, Mr. Arzruni baring an endearing susceptibility to reckless adventure. BERNARD HOLLAND
It seems eminently fitting that the current craze for the mystical Minimalism emanating from Eastern Europe should extend to its ancient precursor, early liturgical chant. How else to explain the teeming crowd that greeted Ensemble Organum on Thursday evening for a program of old Roman chant? For nearly two hours, the eight-man French group held the audience rapt with little more than solo and unison singing.
The concert was presented by Music Before 1800. In fact, some of the music -- 7th- to 13th-century chants from the Papal Chapel for the Mass and canonical hours on Easter -- was from a millennium before. The various traditions -- Greek and Roman, Byzantine and Western -- had only begun to sort themselves out during the period, and the ensemble, led by Marcel Peres, presented a convincing reconstruction of early practice.
Melodies were sometimes lightly accompanied by archaic-sounding glacial pedal tones and ornamented with microtonal quavers and flourishes in Middle Eastern style. By comparison, the full-blown parallel organum of the Sanctus and Agnus Dei seemed a very model of modernity.
It is heartening to see assiduous attention and high artistry being devoted to this arcane but important area; more so still to see large audiences responding to it avidly. JAMES R. OESTREICH
Halloween is not going unnoticed at two other programs this afternoon. At 2 o'clock the "Indian Summer" concert at Battell Recital Hall in Norfolk includes "My Ghost" by Gian Carlo Menotti and a Queen of the Night aria from Mozart's "Magic Flute." In the performing foursome are the soprano Jennifer Goodstein, the cellist Aram Talalian, the pianist Edward Turgeon and the harpsichordist Corey Jamason (432-1966).
At 4 P.M., the pianist Mark Salman gives a recital at the Westport Arts Center, adding Liszt's "Czardas Macabre" and "Mephisto Waltz" to an otherwise non-frightening program of Clementi and Beethoven sonatas (226-1806).
The annual 11 P.M. Halloween concert by the Yale Glee Club and Symphony Orchestra at Woolsey Hall will include excerpts from Orff's "Carmina Burana" to help usher in the witching hour (432-4140).
In New Haven the week's events unfold almost daily starting with an 8 P.M. Tuesday concert by the Chamber Music Society at Yale in Sprague Memorial Hall, at which several artists who participated in the Norfolk Festival return home to perform chamber works of Ravel, Faure and Joan Tower. Wednesday at 8, Peter Wiley, the cellist of the Beaux Arts Trio, and three members of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center convene for an all-Mozart program, and Thursday, same time same hall, Yale Music Spectrum takes center stage, offering works of Couperin, Beethoven, Janacek and Chausson (432-4157).
In 1989 the National Endowment for the Arts broke with previous policy and awarded Yale University a pre-production grant to allow the completion and preparation of Frank Lewin's opera "Burning Bright," based on the John Steinbeck play. The New York City Opera has already planned to mount a production in 1995, but Yale has the honor of presenting the world premiere performances, at 8 P.M. Friday and 7 next Sunday at Woolsey Hall, with Sherry Overholt and Rinde Eckert heading the cast, and Raymond Harvey conducting the Yale Philharmonia. For ticket information, call 432-1234.
Filling the Saturday gap at Woolsey is the New Haven Symphony, which last week ushered in its centennial season under the group's music director, Michael Palmer, and now is ready for its first pops concert. "Bravo Broadway!" is the promise, with the group's assistant conductor, Peter Sacco, on the podium for music from "Les Miserables," "Phantom of the Opera" and earlier favorites from Rodgers and Hammerstein, Lerner and Loewe, and Cole Porter. A preview will be given on Friday at 8 P.M. in the Shelton High School (776-1444).
The Hartford Symphony Pops has a similar program of theater music on tap for Friday and Saturday night at 8 at the Bushnell, the difference being that the shows represented were all born at the Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam. The list includes such hits as "Man of La Mancha," "Annie" and "Shenandoah."
At 8 o'clock on Tuesday and Wednesday the regular Hartford Symphony concerts go forward under the guest leadership of Lawrence Leighton Smith (music director of the Louisville Orchestra). A fanfare by Morton Gould leads off the evening, in observance of the composer's rapidly approaching 80th birthday, followed by two other American masterworks, Samuel Barber's Piano Concerto, with Leon Bates the guest soloist, and the Dance Variations from Leonard Bernstein's "Fancy Free." Closing the program is Mendelssohn's Fifth Symphony, the "Reformation" (244-2999).
In other orchestral fare next week the Farmington Valley Symphony plays Ives, Mozart and Tchaikovsky at 8 P.M. on Saturday at Miss Porter's School (677-1321). At 8:15 P.M. on Saturday, Tibor Pusztai, the associate conductor in Hartford, makes a guest appearance at the helm of the Waterbury Symphony, leading works of Kodaly and Brahms at the Fine Arts Center, and introducing Scott Yoo as violin soloist in Bruch's G minor Concerto (574-4283).
Members of the Fairfield Orchestra will be at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich at 8 P.M. on Saturday, with chamber music by Farwell, Debussy and Amy Beach complementing the museum's Connecticut Impressionism exhibition (972-7400). At the same time, the group called Musicians from Marlboro offer an evening of music for winds by Rossini, Villa-Lobos, Gounod and Mozart at the Stamford Jewish Center (322-7900).
Two other recitals of high promise are scheduled at 8 P.M. on Friday: Richard Goode will play four Beethoven sonatas in at the Quick Center at Fairfield University (254-4010) while the violinist Curtis Macomber, the pianist Gilbert Kalish and the horn virtuoso William Purvis gather in Crowell Hall at Wesleyan University for Brahms, Debussy, Schumann as well as a Ligeti trio and Stockhausen's "In Freunschaft" (344-7944).
The Connecticut Gilbert and Sullivan Society is staging "Trial By Jury" five times over the next two weekends but its companion piece is brand new: a version of "Rumpelstiltskin" by the Society's impresario Robert Cumming. The story is familiar, of course, but Mr. Cumming is said to have fixed it up as "a fairy tale operetta with some humorous wrinkles." There are 8 P.M. performances Friday and Saturday at the Middletown High School, with 2 o'clock matinees there Saturday and next Sunday; there are also repeats at 8 P.M. on Nov. 13 and 2 P.M. on Nov. 14, both in the Ivorytown Playhouse. For reservations, call 873-1005 or 388-3808.
A few weeks ago, Connecticut Grand Opera and Orchestra began its season at the Bushnell with the East Coast premiere of "Bluebeard"; now Offenbach's rollicking score arrives at the Stamford Palace, with James Schwisow as the merry widower, Angelina Reaux starring as his sixth and ultimate wife, and Laurence Gilgore on the podium. Curtain times are 8 P.M. Saturday and 2 next Sunday afternoon (325-4466).
MUSIC
A more successful adaptation was of Rameau's Suite in A, originally for the harpsichord; despite overuse of the pedal and various fussy accelerandos and diminuendos, Mr. O'Riley convincingly drew out Rameau's lyric line. And Stravinsky's Three Movements from "Petrouchka," a highly idiomatic transcription by the composer himself, flew past in sharp focus and brilliant detail.
Mr. O'Riley also offered the New York premiere of Richard Danielpour's "Enchanted Garden." This suite in five movements, inspired by dream images, displayed a smoothly layered eclecticism typical of the composer, with influences as various as Ravel, Messiaen, Barber and Bernstein. The best moments were rapid-fire rhythmic sequences ("Mardi Gras," "From the Underground") that perfectly matched Mr. O'Riley's often electrifying delivery. ALEX ROSS
Ani Kavafian, a Chamber Music Society violinist whose sister Ida was once also in the society but is now in the Beaux-Arts Trio, joined Menahem Pressler, the trio's pianist, for an invigoratingly melodramatic reading of Beethoven's Sonata in C minor (Op. 30, No. 2). And both Kavafians, the society's violists, Walter Trampler and Steven Tenenbom, and the trio's cellist, Peter Wiley, banded together for a warm-toned, beautifully shaded account of Mozart's Quintet in G minor (K. 516), in which passion and philosophical introspection were sensibly balanced.
Ned Rorem's "Spring Music," composed for the Beaux-Arts players in 1990, has everything Mr. Rorem is known for: sweetly inflected lyricism in the Bagatelle, harmonic invention within the bounds of tonality in the Aubade and Fantasy, and dramatic energy in the Toccata and Presto. The trio gave the piece a polished, vital reading, and did the same for Beethoven's "Kakadu" Variations, which closed the program.
The concert is to be repeated tonight at 7:30, with a discussion between Mr. Rorem and Bruce Adolphe at 7. ALLAN KOZINN
Her voice, a matter-of-fact alto that takes on a quaver at urgent moments, has a hard-won calm, whether she is mock-boasting, "I take full advantage of every man I meet" or (in "Mesmerizing," with maracas out of the Stones' "Gimme Shelter") watching herself try to please a thoughtless lover: "You tossed the egg up and I found my hands in place."
In Ms. Phair's songs, lust and love never align for long; there's no satisfaction. "I only wanted more than I knew," she confesses after one more breakup. Yet frustration has only opened her eyes. Sparing neither herself nor her partners, seeing her mistakes as she makes them, she still keeps on trying.
The problem was that Mr. Berio's language often seemed to encourage us to suspend our relation to the present. Given his Italian-accented English and his tendency to use phrases like "thematic virtualities," "permutational and equalizing criteria," "significant presence of absences" and "absent presences," the listener had to be significantly present to follow -- and even then, it was never entirely clear just where we were being led.
Stripped of ornaments, the argument seemed to proceed like this: Once, music was considered a "means of knowledge." The sixth-century philosopher Boethius asserted that connections existed between instruments, the human soul and the structure of the universe. Now we have no similar vision. Instead we have an "immense library of musical knowledge," a collection of musical texts.
These texts are usually arranged in some curatorial structure, including, perhaps, a Baroque room, a Viennese room, a Darmstadt room, a post-modern room. In Mr. Be rio's view, this architectural image is all wrong. Every new composition transforms perspectives of the past (once one hears Schoenberg's music, Brahms's is altered as well); each listener also has a radically different perception even of the present. The trick is to understand and compose music without recourse to rigid categories.
Music analysis and criticism, Mr. Berio seemed to suggest, can rob music of its fluid existence as a "live being" with "still unknown potentials." He insisted on the inherent mystery of music; its powers are undiminished by misguided contemporary urges to "split and divide" it, to control and categorize its "vast, uncharted domains."
It is hard to disagree. Music is certainly more powerful than any attempt to define or describe it; and obviously, it should be composed not for analysis but for the ear. Yet Mr. Berio's view of music also seems limiting. To understand and communicate our experience, we must use categories and analysis. As Mr. Berio notes, the ways we think determine the ways we hear. We split and divide. So too, must Mr. Berio, who sometimes seemed to be talking himself out of a lecturing job.
It will be interesting to see how these themes develop in succeeding lectures. (The next is on Nov. 17.) But in the meantime, the clearest illustrations of Mr. Berio's arguments may be his compositions, for many share the lecture's concern with revising the past or suspending it, with altering the structure of the inherited library.
In "Rendering for Orchestra" (1988-90), for example, Mr. Berio takes sketches meant for Schubert's 10th Symphony and creates a fresco; gaps between sweet Schubertian fragments are filled with Mr. Berio's unsettling musical plaster. In "Sinfonia" (1968), the past is heard in phrases from Mahler, Berg and Strauss, relics of a lost order; the present (of 25 years ago) is heard in the fractured syllables of Martin Luther King's name and in the sounds of revolutionary slogans scrawled on walls of the Sorbonne.
Some of Mr. Berio's music follows the path of criticism: it splits and divides; it argues. In those pieces, the primary impact is in the points made. (This is true, I think, of "Sinfonia" and "Coro"). But in other pieces points are subsidiary to experience, and the music's febrile intensity and imagination permit no single explanation; the music is richer than any language we have to describe it.
That aspect of Mr. Berio's work could be heard in the stunning performances of "Sequenza XI," for guitar (played by Eliot Fisk), which preceded the first lecture, and "Sequenza VIII," for violin (played by Carlo Chiarappa), which followed it. While each instrument is given a distinctive sound world -- as if it occupied its own room in Mr. Berio's historical library -- it is also being markedly transformed by the composition; the walls are dismantled and technical limits dissolved to create unexpected regions of sound.
Mr. Berio may explore such processes in future lectures. And if the talks are unclear, the performances of other "Sequenzas" scheduled to frame each one may help, proving again how much more powerful music can be than attempts to explain it.
CLASSICAL VIEW
In a press release, Dennis Russell Davies -- who conducted Friday and Saturday's identical programs and played the piano splendidly at Sunday afternoon's chamber concert -- mentioned "the tranquil optimism which allowed the creative spirit to soar in times of great personal and social suffering." Arvo Part, Sofia Gubaidulina, Giya Kancheli and Henryk Gorecki are indeed products of recent Eastern and Central European upheavals, but one wonders if "tranquil optimism" forms the basis for a style or a movement.
Using late Shostakovich as a kind of prototype and patron saint, the moderator at Sunday's talk sessions, Joseph Horowitz, cited a common rejection of complexity, the use of repetition and a concentration of religious or spiritual feeling. Yet as one panel member, Philip Glass, later pointed out, purveyors of complexity like Stravinsky, Messiaen and Stockhausen considered themselves as mystical as any European mystic rejecting them.
And if the Shostakovich Violin and Piano Sonata (Op. 134) -- so ardently played by Benjamin Hudson and Mr.  Davies on Sunday -- was indeed music stripped bare, its repetitions and simplicities seemed a world away from the so-called Holy Minimalism (also called mystical Minimalism) of the so-called European mystics.
Drawing definitions from this musically interesting, if intellectually confusing, experience was so frustrating that the listener had to come up with his own. One solution was to line up Mr. Part's "Cantus in Memory of Benjamin Britten," Mr. Kancheli's "Mourned by the Wind" and Mr. Gorecki's "Kleines Requiem fur eine Polka" under a single Holy Minimalist banner.
The word "spiritual" revolved around all three, but I am nagged by the thought that what they really share is a certain physicality, a musical technique that attacks not the mind but the body, -- or at best attacks the mind through the body. In "Mourned by the Wind," Kim Kashkashian's introductory viola solos rocked back and forth in doleful seconds. The intervals widen, sometimes into simple broken chords, always with a slow-motion monotony.
The effect is not spiritual but metabolic. The viola, not an aggressive instrument, soothed the muscles with a gentle, cumulative weight. Mr. Kancheli's glacial regularities quelled excitement, discouraged thought, acted as benign depressant. The Shostakovich filled the mind with information; "Mourned by the Wind" emptied it out.
Yet another world away was Miss Gubaidulina's "Quasi Hoquetus" for viola, bassoon and piano on Sunday. This is one piece that may actually deserve that vague designation "post-modern." Its traditional piano cadences, thrown against antitraditional responses to them, refer to history, yet history is rejected as a coherent process. "Quai Hoquetus," at any rate, was no more mystical or Minimalist than even the weekend's weirdest repertory choice, Richard Strauss's "Metamorphosen," which is neither simple nor repetitive and of arguable spirituality.
Let's also make two more categories: the genuine and the disingenuous. Mr. Part's "Cantus," a dignified and beautifully ordered examination of the A-minor scale, joined the Gubaidulina in a kind of shining innocence. The Gorecki Requiem, despite the reverent words spoken from the stage about it, filled this listener with mistrust, however, its every gesture a seeming attempt to anticipate the expectations of the composer's large and newfound audience.
Indeed, amid all the weekend's holiness, one awaited an honest word about money. For European Mysticism -- like American Minimalism -- is, relatively speaking, a commercial success. It has gone over the head of classical-music tradition and straight into the hearts of hip, affluent, CD-buying, concertgoing, nonclassical listeners. Its appeal is immediate, strong and widespread. It can turn a profit, and deservedly so. At Saturday night's colloquy, Mr. Kancheli noted that he lived in Germany but really wanted to live in the United States. With his sly wit and genial pitchman's skills, he would make a killing here.
But the glass slipper was never made to fit on a New York stage until Tuesday night, when the New York City Opera presented its first performance of a production directed by Robert Johanson that will be performed through Nov. 21. Some of it is corny and sluggish, but much of it, particularly in the second act, is pleasing for adults as well as children.
Parts of the staging and the book certainly require a fair amount of indulgence. The acrobats in dog and cat costumes in the first act seemed to have stepped out of another musical; the King's tiresome shtick didn't match his sincere but unconvincing counsel to his son in "My Best Love," a song that was cut from "Flower Drum Song" and newly inserted here by the City Opera; there were some awkwardly sentimental moments that turned romance into kitsch; and given her magical powers, the Fairy Godmother was given a very awkward way of making her entrances and exits.
The musical's book has also always been considered stiff, even in the reviews of the initial broadcast. This production uses Steve Allen's adaptation of Hammerstein's original text and reorders some of the numbers. Some of Mr. Allen's lines work (Cinderella to Prince: "I don't get out much"); others do not.
But by the time Cinderella reaches the ball, Rodgers's inventive melodies and dances have begun to work their wiles. The waltzing phrases of "Ten Minutes Ago," the witty cattiness of the "Stepsisters' Lament" and the love song "Do I Love You Because You're Beautiful," quiet most doubts. And when Cinderella, in rags, welcomes her family with her supposedly imagined picture of the ball ("A Lovely Night"), she even inspires her stepsisters and stepmother to join her in a wistful dance.
As Cinderella, Crista Moore was sweet and winsome and appealingly human (if occasionally vocally strained). George Dvorsky, as the Prince, looked the part, and while his rendition of "Loneliness of Evening" (a song originally written for "South Pacific" and first used in this musical in the 1965 broadcast) was pale, he was transformed to a viable Broadway-style hero by the appearance of Cinderella. George S. Irving's King was inconsistent, joking about philandering one minute, meant to be taken seriously as a mature lover the next. But he made a good case for the gentle humor of "If I Weren't King," a song cut before the original broadcast, but restored here.
Nancy Marchand was a wry, domineering Stepmother, and her two daughters -- Alix Korey as Joy and Jeanette Palmer as Portia -- were obnoxious, whining and finally, almost winning. Sally Ann Howes lived up to her stage and film credits as the Fairy Godmother. Ron Baker was a strong herald, Maria Karnilova an unsteady Queen.
"Cinderella" is a prettified version of the tale, if such a thing can be imagined. No child will complain, but no one except Cinderella is taken too seriously (Disney gave a far more potent portrait of what she is up against). But this musical and this production take enough liberties with the story to give it some unexpected charms. One could be found in the Prince's uncomfortable expression during the finale, as he was given a warm embrace by his new mother-in-law.  Cinderella  Music by Richard Rodgers, lyrics and book by Oscar Hammerstein 2d; book adapted by Steve Allen; orchestrations by Robert Russell Bennett; adapted for the stage by Robert Johanson; conductor, Eric Stern; director and choreographer, Mr. Johanson; co-choreographer, Sharon Halley; sets by Henry Bardon; costumes by Gregg Barnes; lighting by Jeff Davis. Performed by the New York City Opera at the New York State Theater. Fairy Godmother . . . Sally Ann Howes Cinderella's Stepmother . . . Nancy Marchand Joy . . . Alix Korey Portia . . . Jeanette Palmer Cinderella . . . Crista Moore Queen . . . Maria Karnilova King . . . George S. Irving Prince . . . George Dvorsky WITH: Ron Baker, Debbi Fuhrman, Stephanie Godino, Jonathan Green, John Lankston, Abigail Mentzer, Andrew Pacho and Shawn Stevens.
With roots that go back to 1776, the Bolshoi Symphony Orchestra is the oldest orchestra in Russia. It has spent the greater part of its history playing for the opera and ballet at the Bolshoi Theater, where, in the Russian tradition, orchestral playing is treated not as mere accompaniment but as a dramatic force. Since Saturday was the centenary of Tchaikovsky's death, the orchestra and its music director, Aleksandr Lazarev, devoted a Sunday afternoon concert entirely to his works. Within the first few pages of "Capriccio Italien" the orchestra's sonic thumb print was clear.
Its most immediate feature was the brass playing: a bracing sound, slightly tangy with the hint of a buzz, and absolutely solid ensemble. The wind playing had a distinctive coloration, too, more nasal than that of American orchestras, but also more throughly blended. And the strings were dark and lush and could make a sweeping line resonate with power.
There were times when one might quibble with Mr. Lazarev's interpretation. A tendency to paint sections of the "Capriccio Italien" and the Symphony No. 6 in sharply clipped strokes sometimes had an odd effect. But there was hardly a lack of flow in the overall readings, and the Symphony had both its thrilling and more serenely moving moments.
The program also included Tatyana's Letter Scene from "Eugene Onegin," sung with beauty, subtlety and emotional power by Mariya Gavrilova, the soprano who sang the role when the Bolshoi company visited the Metropolitan Opera House in 1991.
The orchestra will also play a Tchaikovsky, Dvorak and Rachmaninoff program at 8 P.M. tomorrow at the Tillis Center at the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University in Brookville and a Tchaikovsky and Shostakovich program at Carnegie Hall at 8 P.M. on Nov. 17. ALLAN KOZINN
The second half was given over to Chopin: the Polonaise-Fantaisie, two Nocturnes (Op. 15, No. 2, and Op. 55, No. 1), six Etudes (mainly from Op. 10) and the third Ballade (Op. 47).  Ms. Davidovich's playing was fluidly expressive throughout, once again tending toward restraint. One might wish for a more essentially beautiful tone, especially in late Brahms, and also for a clearer sense of contrast, but the loud and warm applause after Ms. Davidovich's reading of the Ballade in A-flat was an apt recognition of her musicianship. ALEX ROSS
They don't have a group name yet, but four fine young artists -- the violinist Pamela Frank, the violist Paul Neubauer, the cellist Carter Brey and the pianist Christopher O'Riley -- are getting together for what should be a sterling evening of chamber music by Mozart, Brahms and Aaron Jay Kernis. The concert tonight at 8 o'clock at Congregation Emanu-El of Westchester in Rye opens the season for the Westchester Chamber Music Society.
Later in the season, the society will offer programs by such equally eminent artists and ensembles as the violinist Oscar Shumsky, the Emerson Quartet, the Tokyo String Quartet, the Hagen Quartet and the Mannes Trio. For more details, the numbers to call are 948-6533 or 723- 0222.
Keyboard and string instruments dominate the rest of the week, starting Wednesday at 12:35 P.M.when Keith Robellard, director of music both at First Congregational Church and Temple Beth El of Chappaqua, comes to White Plains to perform works by Bach, Walton and Percy Whitlock at Grace Episcopal Church. For more information, the number to call is 949-0384. Another organ program brings Marilyn Keiser, an Indiana University professor, to Hitchcock Presbyterian Church in Scarsdale next Sunday at 4 P.M. The program ranges from Bach to "Rubrics," a new piece by the American composer Dan Locklair. More information is available by calling 723-3311.
Eric Lewis, founding violinist of the Manhattan String Quartet, and the pianist Norman Carey are presenting an evening of Faure, Brahms and Beethoven sonatas on Friday at 8 o'clock at Manhattanville College in Purchase. Further details can be obtained by calling 694-220.
Another superb violin-piano duo, consisting of Maria Bachmann and Jon Klibonoff, will play Beethoven, Schumann, Ravel and Stravinsky for Performers of Westchester Friday at 8:30 P.M. The recital will take place in a private New Rochelle home, with a Mamaroneck repeat scheduled next Sunday at 4 P.M. For locations and reservations, the number to call is 693-1151.
The Hoff-Barthelson Faculty Concert Series continues in Scarsdale Friday at 8 o'clock with an international evening: the Israeli-born cellist Maya Baiser and the Australian pianist Lisa Moore playing works by Shostakovich, Nin, Franck and the late Astor Piazzolla. For more information call 723-1169.
In Purchase on Friday at 8 P.M., the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra opens its three-concert series at the State University of New York, with Alicia de Larrocha as the guest soloist in Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 23 in A major. An Orpheus member, David Jolley, will also be featured in the premiere of a horn concerto by the Pulitzer Prize winner Ellen Taaffe Zwilich. The conductorless program will be rounded out with Handel and Ravel. More details are available by calling 251-6200.
A different sort of string complement will perform Friday at 8 P.M. at a "Guitar Summit" at Westchester Community College in Valhalla. Four famous players of contrasting stylistic styles, steeped respectively in classical, flamenco, jazz and blues traditions, are on a monthlong tour being billed, with some justification, as a "once-in-a-lifetime collaboration." The concert marks the only Westchester appearance of these four masters of the guitar: Pepe Romero, Paco Pena, Joe Pass and Leo Kottke.  Three piano recitals are scheduled next Saturday at 8 P.M.
Andrew Armstrong, the 19-year-old who sprang to attention last spring when Van Cliburn singled him out for special notice at the Van Cliburn Competition in Texas, plays Haydn, Ravel and Chopin at Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains. For more information, call 949-0384.
The Canadian pianist Andre Laplante, whose laureate medals include those earned at the Geneva and Tchaikovsky International Competitions, has chosen an all-Liszt program for his appearance at Concordia College in Bronxville. The number to call for more information is 337-9300.
At SUNY Purchase, the Dutch pianist Rian de Waal moves on from several Liszt pieces to five of Brahms's "Klavierstucke" and Leopold Godowsky's virtuosic transcriptions of Schubert's song "Gute Nacht" and Johann Strauss' "Artist's Life" waltzes. The information number is 251-6200.
Bach is on the agenda for Friends of Music at Ossining High School on Saturday at 8:30 P.M. The New York Chamber Soloists not only perform the Fifth Brandenburg Concerto, but also offer the rare opportunity of hearing the complete "Musical Offering." The numbers to call are 271-4657 or 271-4800.
Turning to music in a lighter vein, Peter Yarrow -- of Peter, Paul and Mary -- gives a solo Concert for the Generations at 3 P.M today at Temple Israel in New Rochelle. This promoters hope that this event will "bring people of all ages and backgrounds together for the enjoyment of music" and raise funds for the temple and the New Rochelle Coalition for Mutual Respect.
Tonight at 7:30, Taj Mahal and Guy Davis team up for an evening of Blues and "African-American Roots Music" at the Tarrytown Music Hall. The number to call for more information is 332-8497.
Many of those same traditions will be explored next Sunday at 4 P.M. as Women of the Calabash bring their unusual instruments and striking three-part harmonies to a free program at Briarcliff Congregational Church. The numbers to call for more information are 941-1513 or 941-4368.
A trip to Lehman College in the Bronx yields the premiere production of "Looking Back: The Music of Micki Grant," a musical derived from "Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope," "Your Arms Too Short to Box With God" and other of Ms. Grant's theatrical works. Curtain times in Lovinger Theater are 8 P.M. Thursday, Friday and Saturday, with additional 3 o'clock matinees Wednesday and next Sunday. Tickets will be available at the door. For driving directions, the number to call is (718) 960-8083.
The Turning Point Coffeehouse, across the river in Piermont, has three big-name folk stars on the performing agenda: Bill Staines appears there Wednesday at 8 P.M., Townes Van Zandt arrives for a 9 P.M. show on Friday, and Eric Anderson sings next Sunday at 7:30 P.M. The information number is 359-1089.
The Scottish singer-songwriter Al Stewart headlines "a special evening of acoustic music" on Friday at 8 P.M. at the Irvington Town Hall Theater, with Lucy Kaplansky adding a dash of New York folk humor. The number to call for more information is 332-8497.
Barry Louis Polisar, whose specialty is music for children, takes his songs, stories and comic portraits to the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck for back-to-back shows 11 A.M. and 2 P.M. on Saturday. The information number is 698-0098.
On Saturday at 8 P.M., Roy Book Binder dispenses his blues-inflected ballads at the Treestar Coffeehouse, in the Mount Kisco Presbyterian Church. For more information, the number to call is (203) 438-6102.  MUSIC  Correction:  November 18, 1993, Thursday
The Music column in the Westchester Weekly on Sunday misstated the date of a piano recital by Andrew Armstrong at Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains. It is at 8 P.M. tomorrow, Nov. 19not Saturday.
The oddest aspect of the music was its avoidance of pleasure. Mr. Braxton, who was a star of the jazz-related improvisers in the late 1960's and early 1970's, has seen his popularity diminish over the years, just as the puritanical suspicion of harmony and rhythm and entertainment has waned.
Mr. Braxton, who rarely plays in New York, has stuck to his epoch: the set didn't have a moment of steady time -- Mr. Hemingway insinuated a jazzlike cymbal pattern for a minute or two -- there never seemed to be any harmonic invention, and the melodies, in their jumps and angularities, were never worth repeating.
Mr. Braxton, clearly a gifted musician, was proposing a world without many emotional avenues, one where many of the possibilities of American popular culture were overlooked in favor of what once passed as experimentation.
Mr. Gerhardt played with the burnished tone, focused intonation and technical dexterity that one expects of young soloists in these days of high- gloss conservatory training. For the most part, he endeavored to use that precision to more expressive ends.
He was not always fully persuasive. In parts of the Beethoven Sonata in A (Op. 69) and the Brahms Sonata in F (Op. 99), suggestions of intensity and drama sounded premeditated and superficial. There must, of course, be some premeditation; sensitive interpretations don't just happen, and it was clear that Mr. Gerhardt and his pianist, Markus Becker, took great care in manipulating the music's dynamics, tempos and balances. What was missing was the spark of spontaneity (or the impression of it) that is the heart of a transcendent performance.
That said, Mr. Gerhardt found both the passion and the color in Debussy's sensuous Sonata in D minor. And he ended the program with a thrilling, high-tension account of Kodaly's Sonata for Unaccompanied Cello (Op. 8), an exquisite, demanding work full of trilled chordal passages, fleet figuration and long lines underpinned with pizzicato accompaniment. ALLAN KOZINN
Mr. Thorogood was playing bar-band music, a mixture of blues and rock and even a bit of country, that can be heard in cities, towns and villages across the United States. He and the Destroyers aren't much better than any of the thousands of bands out there. He can't sing that well, and his guitar playing is limited. But with his enthusiasm and lack of pretention, and the pure, average-guyism he exudes, Mr. Thorogood knows how to promote a good time. And since he has been playing for a long time, he knows his way around the stage, jumping a bit now and then, duck walking, playing to the audience. He knows his sponsors too: on Monday he spent a fair amount of time shilling for Budweiser beer.
Much of the show comprised bar-band staples, many of them from the Chess Records catalogue, including J. B. Lenoir's "Madison Blues," Bo Diddley's "Who Do You Love," Muddy Waters's "I'm Ready," Chuck Berry's "No Particular Place to Go," along with John Lee Hooker's "One Bourbon, One Scotch, One Beer," and Elmore James's "Sky Is Crying." He sang drinking songs and tunes that told stories. And he did it all to a solid rock-and-roll groove that had the audience dancing in the aisles. PETER WATROUS
Miss Trevi headlined a three-band show of Mexican pop music at the Paramount Theater on Friday, and she came off part Ralph Nader, part lucha libre (Mexican pro wrestling) and part Madonna. She opened her show to "Gloria," sung by her backup band, and she bounced out, hair flying around, arms in the air as if she had just conquered the good guy in white with a double flip and a forearm to the windpipe. She sings in a hoarse voice and talks as if she just ate gravel, which gives her a tough-girl air when she launches into an assault on Ross Perot for his Mexico bashing.
On one number, "Los Borregos" ("The Sheep"), Miss Trevi sang about trying to fall asleep while worrying about the third world. She counts sheep, then wonders how so many sheep could be scared of one ugly wolf. The song, whose chorus is "The sheep are jumping into the corral," turns into a pure pop dance tune, all the while advocating rebellion. From there she moved right into tunes with words like "I don't know what I'm going to do without you" and "Why did you leave?"
But Miss Trevi never played the fool. As much as her act is an extended joke, it never places her in a submissive position, and she always seems completely self-assured. Several times during the concert she rolled around on the floor, ending up on her knees at the edge of the stage singing. Several men in the audience grabbed at her hair, and she sang directly to them, her eyes making contact until they let go. She knew exactly where she was and what kind of power she was generating, and it was not purely sexual. She ended her set with the Rolling Stones' "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction."
Los Yonics opened the show with slow and stately romantic ballads that turned love and heartbreak into a religion. Then came La Mafia, which sings both denationalized pop ballads along with Mexican cumbias, the rolling dance music full of jokes and rural wit. La Mafia's appeal is largely to women, and they jammed the lip of the stage, many with children in tow, looking to shake the lead singer's hand or have him sign an autograph. The band plays amiable, polite music that looks more to the past than to the future. The band finished its set with its first hit, "Como Duele Amor" ("How Love Hurts"), then wandered offstage waving.
Miss Trevi, by comparison, ended her show by taking off her underwear and throwing it to the screaming crowd.
Mr. Herring is a hard-blowing alto saxophonist who first appeared in New York a decade ago, owing a good part of his style to Cannonball Adderley and John Coltrane. He has evolved distinctive knotty, complex lines. Sometimes he plays smooth, rolling lines that jet along only to stop on a repeated, crying melody. He uses a harsh tone and an unperturbable rhythmic thrust, tearing through tunes with real aggression. He's on a mission, and that mission is to tear down the house.
With all his power and intensity, Mr. Herring is coming into his own. And so is the band he has assembled: Scott Wenholdt on trumpet, Cyrus Chestnut on piano, Ira Coleman on bass and Carl Allen on drums. It's a pleasure to hear so many young musicians tearing the place up. Mr. Wenholdt hasn't been around long, but he's turning into an exceptional player, and he regularly adds vinegary notes to his long and rhythmically charged lines. The rhythm section consistently prodded the soloists, turning every improvisation into a three-way conversation.
The pianist is the quarterback of a rhythm section, and Mr. Chestnut reveled in his role, feeding soloists melodic ideas, adding tension by letting his chords wander away from a song's blueprint, and challenging the drummer in a rhythmic exchange. And as a soloist he's all over the piano, his left hand banging out rumbling mountains of notes, his right dancing merrily in the upper register. Mr. Chestnut radiates a joy in playing, and he does it without any sort of fear: he shows that he's smart and funky and loves to swing. PETER WATROUS
But the Afghan Whigs don't take themselves as seriously as Pearl Jam or U2, both of which they resemble at times. Between songs, Mr. Dulli shrugged off the mood of the lyrics, joking with the crowd, announcing a "cigarette break." During songs he sometimes extended the band's riffs and sang the lyrics of a pop love song like the Spinners' "I'll Be Around" or the Supremes' "Come See About Me" with the same bleak tone as his own words. It was simultaneously a way of suggesting darker meanings to the old songs and proclaiming his own efforts as one more form of entertainment.
On Friday, he was so busy toying with irony that he just about threw away the second half of the set. Quoting songs from Prince's "When Doves Cry" to Belly's "Feed the Tree," he slipped out of character so many times he made his own songs seem contrived. While his songs portray him as a dismal partner, Mr. Dulli is becoming one of alternative rock's sex symbols. During an encore, he invited a woman onto the stage to dance; she moved in close and started to unbutton his shirt, causing him to sputter, "Jeez!"
Love Jones, a group from Louisville, Ky., that opened the show, is like a lounge band on truth serum. Dressed in matching polyester jackets (blue, then red), the band sang close harmonies over two-chord vamps from bossa nova to light funk. Clever, cynical lyrics -- "When things turn ugly, I turn on you," the singer tells a lover -- update the gambits of groups like Dan Hicks and His Hot Licks.
Onstage, Love Jones's parodic ambitions grow more savage. A medley of songs by Black Flag and Journey spoofed punk self-righteousness and hard-rock pretensions. And Ben Daughtrey, on congas and vocals, was a manic emcee, switching from unctuousness to hostility, mimicking a gangster rapper one moment and a 50's crooner the next. The asides soon upstaged the songs, marking Love Jones as a novelty act. JON PARELES
The songs in the first part of the evening ranged from "Some Enchanted Evening" (her personal candidate for popular music's most damaging song in creating unrealistic hopes) to Christine Lavin's contemporary folk ballad "The Kind of Love You Never Recover From." The work of Rodgers and Hart and Jerome Kern was especially well-represented.
The second half of the evening featured Maury Yeston's "December Songs," a cycle of 10 songs especially written for Ms. Marcovicci about a contemporary woman trying to recover from the loss of a great love. Inspired by Schubert's "Winterreise," the work has many Schubertian pianistic touches, while its melodic style veers between an early-19th-century Germanic heaviness and Henry Mancini's Hollywood.
Vocally, Ms. Marcovicci fits no mold. A gifted singing actress, she phrases her material in short-breathed gusts that convey the sense of her eagerly living each lyric as it goes along. Grainy in its bottom end with a lilting Joan Baez-like upper register, her voice has a wavering vulnerability that often finds her landing below the note. The tension between this folkish flightiness and Ms. Marcovicci's regal diction and deportment lends her the aura of an Audrey Hepburn character.
What cinched the connection between Ms. Marcovicci and her audience on Wednesday was a shared sense of the singer as a wistful romantic surrogate for everyone in the hall. But along with that wistfulness came an understanding that the storybook fantasies and nostalgic pop dreams she conjured are luxuries to be savored.
Joan Baez's retrospective traces her arc from quivery-voiced solo folkie to reluctant pop careerist to proud 1960's survivor and community-sing leader. It is packed with previously unreleased songs: duets with Bob Dylan (from 1963, 1964 and 1976, all very loose), collaborations with members of the Grateful Dead, concert recordings. The set won't change the minds of people who find Ms. Baez overly earnest and self-righteous, and true to 1960's style, it includes unvarnished clinkers; some of the unreleased material should have stayed that way. Still, the version of the traditional "Jackaroe" with the Dead's Jerry Garcia and Mickey Hart sparkles, and Ms. Baez's effect on three decades of audiences remains heartwarming. JON PARELES  POP MUSIC
The selections were culled from 60 hours of music performed by Booker, using only an upright piano, in his element at the Maple Leaf Bar in New Orleans. Here he felt comfortable enough, on occasion, to divert patrons with nothing more than an evening of jive talk and false starts on the keys. The standout numbers on these releases toss off barbs of wit and anguish that strike with casual precision.
When Booker sat down to play seriously, his performances touched on the styles of a wide group of jazz, rhythm-and-blues and classical musicians. The abrupt block chords and barrelhouse stomps produced by his left hand reinvigorate the rock syncopation of "Eleanor Rigby" on the "Spiders" album even as Booker's right hand strengthens the song's string-quartet echoes.
Throughout, Booker shows flair for revisiting the 60's. Creeping along, "A Taste of Honey" becomes a contemplation of vast ruins, followed by a defiantly jaunty rendition of "He's Got the Whole World in His Hands." The impeccable stride piano instrumental of "Papa Was a Rascal" is as characteristic of Booker as the sprawling vocal version of the same song on "Resurrection." In this treatment, he spins a wild tale of miscegenation and international paranoia. He builds passages between melodic phrases with scampering keyboard runs that complement his zany lyric flights.
Booker's voice is anemic at times, and while he can command an ardent falsetto, he knows it is no match for his left hand, which takes over near the end of "Resurrection."
The piano showpiece that results is a breakneck medley that goes back and forth between "Wine-Spo-Dee-O-Dee" and "It Should Have Been Me." Booker tops that feat with a ragtime "Pop's Dilemma" that saunters through three tempo changes before sliding into "Good Night Irene," done with a deft bayou bounce. Doubters need no more proof than these collections that James Booker was made for a city where music grows in bouquets.  RECORDINGS VIEW Milo Miles is a commentator on world music for National Public Radio.
Mr. Hampson devoted the first half of his program to 19th-century European works and sang American works (mostly 20th century) after the intermission. In a beguiling account of Beethoven's "An die ferne Geliebte," Mr. Hampson and his pianist, Craig Rutenberg, played with coloration and texture in a way that illuminated the topography of Beethoven's almost pictorial response to Alois Jeitteles's cycle. A similar flexibility argued eloquently for Grieg's "Sechs Lieder" (Op. 48).
Between the Beethoven and Grieg, Mr. Hampson offered responses by Robert Franz, Carl Loewe and Robert Schumann to the poetry of Robert Burns. The settings were in German translations, yet even in so quirky a piece as "What Is That at My Bower Door" (called "Findlay" in Loewe's setting), the spirit comes through, abetted by the music, which in turn benefited from the unfailing sense of character Mr. Hampson brought to each piece.
Mr. Hampson began the American half of the program with a selection of Charles Ives songs, among them "The Housatonic at Stockbridge," a subtle rendering of "Thoreau" and a vividly illustrative account of "Memories A and B." These have become staples of the recital repertory lately, but Mr. Hampson sang them with unusual vividness.
There were some finds among the other American pieces. John Duke's 1945 settings of "Richard Cory," "Miniver Cheevy" and "Luke Havergal" reflect the elegance, wit and poignancy of the Edward Arlington Robinson poems. Vittorio Giannini's gorgeous "Tell Me, Oh Blue, Blue Sky" is an irresistible charmer, and Sidney Homer's "Gen. William Booth Enters Into Heaven" and Roger Ames's arrangement of "The Erie Canal" thrive on their rough-hewn, folk roots, as did the encores, which included Walter Damrosch's "Danny Deever" and Aaron Copland's "Long Time Ago."
As a welcome bonus, Mr. Hampson and Carla Maria Verdino-Sullwold provided copious program notes, with complete texts and translations. ALLAN KOZINN
The works of the Japanese composer Somei Satoh have found a sizable constituency in the United States in recent years, thanks largely to the efforts of Margaret Leng Tan, a pianist who has championed his music, and New Albion Records, a West Coast label that specializes in unusual repertory with Minimalist leanings. In a program of Mr. Satoh's music on Tuesday evening, Ms. Tan was among the performers, who also included Darynn Zimmer, soprano, Thomas Buckner, baritone; Sara Cutler, harpist; John Kennedy, percussionist, and the Sirius String Quartet.
The six works on the program were slow, introspective, melancholy pieces, cast in the thoroughly tonal post-Minimalist language that is now fashionable around the world. If not for certain percussive effects in traditional Japanese tunings, his music could almost pass for that of Henryk Gorecki, Arvo Part or others among the European Mystics.
Yet one gets the impression that Mr. Satoh is more concerned with metaphysical verities than with theories of style. In "Lament for Spring" (1989) for solo harp, isolated tones gradually coalesce into wistful figuration to describe what Mr. Satoh calls the "hidden, disconsolate sadness" within the joy of spring. A string quartet, "Toward the Night" (1988), is meant to portray mankind's gradual slide toward extinction. And "A Gate Into Infinity" (1988), for violin, piano and percussion, is a compellingly intense musical arch.
Two works for soprano, "Homa" (1988) and "The Heavenly Spheres Are Illuminated by Lights" (1979), are haunting elegies, and "Burning Meditation" (1993) uses simple, low-lying baritone melodies and a lovely texture (strings, harp and tubular bell) to illuminate Kazuko Shiraishi's text.
Six sorrowful, glacially paced works can be a lot for one sitting, yet the pieces posed challenges of different sorts for both the players and the listeners, and there is some variety in the coloration Mr. Satoh applied to each work. He also had the benefit on Tuesday of consistently eloquent, committed performances.  ALLAN KOZINN
One of the most successful is Blind Melon. Musically, its blues-tinged grooves hark back to the Southern boogie of the Allman Brothers Band and to West Coast acid rock of the Quicksilver Messenger Service and the Grateful Dead. The video for Blind Melon's MTV breakthrough single, "No Rain," which propelled its self-titled debut album into the Top 3 after nine months as a sleeper, has a pastoral vibe, with the band frolicking in a flower-filled meadow. The quintet's long hair and facial foliage mark them out as stoners, an impression accentuated by the hemp seeds on the album's back cover. The singer Shannon Hoon performs barefoot and has a tendency to shed his clothes onstage or on the cover of Rolling Stone.
Blind Melon grew up on classic rock artists like Traffic and Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young. The band has talked of using "vintage" amplifiers and equipment to recapture the warmth and feel of that era's music, which disappeared with the advent of digital recording and drum machines. Lyrically, Blind Melon's songs also have something of the aura of the early 70's, when the counterculture's momentum had ebbed and its agenda had contracted to an apolitical, feel-good ethos. There's a similar mellow spirit to the Spin Doctors, who combine the radio-friendly raunch of the Steve Miller Band and the truckin' affability of the Dead.
Blind Melon recently toured with Lenny Kravitz, another highly successful retro-rocker. Like Blind Melon, Mr. Kravitz deliberately uses antiquated studio technology to make the rock equivalent of reproduction antiques. He expertly simulates production styles of his heroes like Jimi Hendrix, John Lennon and Curtis Mayfield.
A supremely videogenic performer who nonetheless professes to hate MTV, Mr. Kravitz carries his fetish for period detail through to his visual presentation. In the video for the Hendrix-pastiche "Are You Gonna Go My Way?," Mr. Kravitz's bassist sports a "white Afro" uncannily reminiscent of the coiffure of Noel Redding, bassist in the Jimi Hendrix Experience.
While Mr. Kravitz's music and image are based in pure post-modern pick-and-mix, his lyrics bypass the irony and complexity of post-modern experience and return to the naivete of an age when people believed music could change the world. Whatever his or Blind Melon's intentions, both provide counterculture for couch potatoes, a consumer package of groovy idealism with all the confrontation and commitment removed.
These days, "alternative" can almost be defined as not contemporary, insofar as most alternative bands spurn the state-of-the-art techniques that underpin rap, new jack swing and techno, preferring to renovate a period style from rock's past. This predilection doesn't mean their music is irrelevant, it just means such bands are distinguishable by the degree of sophistication with which they rework material from rock's archives.
Some bands offer revivalism filtered through tongue-in-cheek humor, as with White Zombie's nouveau biker rock (Steppenwolf) or Raging Slab's resurrection of Southern rock (Black Oak Arkansas). Perhaps the wittiest of the retro bands is Urge Overkill, which combines Cheap Trick-inspired pop-metal anthems with a stylized image influenced by James Brown, the Who and the playboy suaveness of the Rat Pack (Sinatra, Sammy Davis Jr., et al). Urge Overkill's latest album, "Saturation," is its major-label debut, but even as an indie band playing grubby clubs the threesome comported themselves like stadium superstars.
One could call this esthetic record-collection rock, since a band is interesting in proportion to the esoteric scope of its musical learning. Bands get a camp frisson by rehabilitating something that was once beyond the pale. But the thrill wears off quickly. For instance, when late 80's bands like the Butt hole Surfers and Tad revived Black Sabbath's ponderous riffs, it felt like a daring challenge to the approved canon of underground rock. But after grunge, Sabbath-style heaviness is no longer a novelty, it's an oppressive norm. In indie music, the smart operators seek out neglected genres, to titillate the hipster's easily jaded palette. Where financiers speculate in futures, bands today speculate in pasts.
IN AMERICA, PAVEMENT IS THE king of record-collection rock. Its music is a patchwork of ideas filched from the history of avant-garde and primitivist rock (70's neo-pschedelic bands like Can and Faust, post-punk weirdos like Pere Ubu and the Fall). In Britain, Stereolab rivals Pavement when it comes to arcana. On its two 1993 albums, "Space Age Bachelor Pad Music" and "Transient Random-Noise Bursts With Announcements," the band explores the unlikely links between the droning mantras of Velvet Underground and La Monte Young and early 60's easy-listening (in particular Martin Denny, inventor of a Muzak brand called exotica).
Rock has always had a place for the curator mentality. The Rolling Stones began as obsessive collectors of rare blues records. But they at least went on to create the soundtrack of their time. Too many of today's indie bands are making music about music, scribbling footnotes in the Great Book of Rock. The CDreissue boom has made all kinds of obscure artists readily available. As baby boomers replace their worn LP's with CD's, there's a glut of used vinyl on the market.
All this encourages bands to scale new heights of perversity and obscurantism when it comes to reference points. Swamped by music, dwarfed by previous eras' achievements, twentysomething musicians like Steve Malkmus of Pavement compensate with irony and knowingness. But recently, perhaps tired of being painfully hip, Mr. Malkmus has talked of a return to the "Zen-like simplicity" of soft-rock groups like the Eagles and Fleetwood Mac as a route out of the mire of eclecticism. Such a paradoxical strategy -- going back in time in order to go forward -- is emblematic of the state of rock.
Rock's retrogressive tendencies approach redundancy with the Tribute Album, wherein various artists pay respect to iconic figures like Neil Young, Syd Barrett or Captain Beefheart. A current example is "Stone Free: A Tribute to Jimi Hendrix," a collection of pointlessly faithful versions of the acid rock visionary's classics, by artists as diverse as Eric Clapton, Belly and the Cure.
Esthetically dubious, maybe, but the commercial logic of "Stone Free" and similar projects like the forthcoming KISS tribute is unassailable. As well as intriguing fans of the honored artist, these albums tempt diehard followers of each contributing band to shell out to complete their collections.
On a similar wavelength, the future may see more exercises in nostalgia like Guns 'n' Roses's just released "The Spaghetti Incident?," where one band pays homage to its roots. In this case, Guns 'n' Roses cover a bunch of punk songs by bands like the UK Subs, the Damned, and the New York Dolls.  Along with paying respect to artists that influenced them, Guns 'n' Roses is trying to rewrite its place in rock history as a descendant of punk as opposed to heavy metal.
In some ways, sample-based music would seem to be the ultimate form of record-collection rock, since its collage esthetic involves the wholesale appropriation of licks and riffs from old records. But the best sampler music -- from rap groups like Cypress Hill or the Goats, techno artists like the Prodigy or Ultramarine and a precious few rock bands like the Young Gods -- revitalizes the music of the past. They weld together incongruous elements to create a kind of Frankenstein pop, in which musical atmospheres from different eras are compelled to coexist. Or they warp their sources on the sampler keyboard until barely recognizable. Or they simply ransack the archives with an invigorating brutality that's infinitely preferable to the wan reverence of retro-rockers. GROUP DESIGN
Ever wonder where a band comes up with its sound and image? Here's a guide to influences: what's hot and what's not.
*Hardy perennials (obvious but unassailably cool): the Rolling Stones, the Beatles.
*Passe (exhausted by recent overuse): Big Star, Black Sabbath, Led Zeppelin, Funkadelic, Neil Young, My Bloody Valentine, Husker Du.
*Hot but maybe not for much longer: Cheap Trick, Pink Floyd and Brian Eno, Can and Faust, the Fall, Lynyrd Skynyrd, Captain Beefheart, Rush.
*Outside contenders for '94: King Crimson, Gentle Giant, early Roxy Music, Weather Report, dancehall reggae-ragga, Fairport Convention, Foghat.  POP VIEW Simon Reynolds is the author of "Blissed Out: The Raptures of Rock."
Mr. Trittle led what seemed to be strong and stylish performances of all these works. I say "seemed" because the acoustics of the church tend to swallow musical detail; from my seat off to the side, instrumental playing was a blur. The soloists in the Haydn -- Kathy Etherington (soprano), Karen Krueger (mezzo-soprano), Philip Anderson (tenor) and Arizeder Urreiztieta (bass) -- were all proficient, and Neil Farrell's countertenor solos in the Bernstein floated out hauntingly from the organ loft. The choir produced a solid, colorful sound throughout. ALEX ROSS
Correction:  December 11, 1993, Saturday
A brief music review on Tuesday about a performance of Leonard Bernstein's "Chichester Psalms" at the Church of St. Ignatius Loyola in Manhattan on Dec. 1 misidentified the countertenor soloist. He was Johnson Flucker; the tenor soloist was Neil Farrell.



The band, which was celebrating the release of a new album, "The Shape I'm In" (Landmark), also featured a handful of promising soloists, including Bill Charlap on piano and Tim Ries on saxophones. For the first set, Mr. Ries had most of the solos, and on "Changes," a piece with rapidly moving harmonies, he started out deftly weaving his way through the song, using a woolen tone, only to open up his playing with shakes and squeals that became progressively harder.
The Toccata also begins with blazing ambition and then suddenly pulls back. Ms. Dokovska, a young Bulgarian by way of the Juilliard School, seems to base movement not, as Ravel did, on 17th- and 18th-century dance models but on the limits of her considerable technique. Play fast while you can, less fast when you have to. She punctuates the necessarily slower Forlane and Minuet with sighing hesitations. The 19th-century salon is revisited; Sinding and Moszkowski hold forth.
One can almost forgive Ms. Dokovska's confusion. She is a pianist of attractive musical instincts and a certain amount of innocence, and she is being asked to confront one of music's more puzzling split personalities. For there are two Ravels.
The first is a reinventor of the past, an austere salvager of France's Baroque pre-eminence. Ravel's chord extensions (where would modern jazz be without them?) emitted softened modal melody that served as a metaphor for all things French and ancient. "La gloire" old and "la gloire" new flow simultaneously through this music.
Then there is Ravel the gaudy orchestral trickster, author of the perfectly aimed coloristic effect. Who else would have placed a saxophone on the ramparts of Mussorgsky's "Old Castle"? He is the compulsive orchestrator of his own piano music and perhaps the most tasteful sensationalist who ever composed. This is the Ravel of "Scarbo" and "Alborada del Gracioso," both of which elevate pianistic difficulties to Olympian parlor tricks.
Most people probably know "Le Tombeau" in its shortened orchestral form and not its six-movement original. The two are different compositions despite their identical language: one a dignified exercise in black-and-white, the other an endearing ice-cream sundae of a piece. What Ms. Dokovska has not realized is that Ravel kept his two personalities separated. She tries to mix them together.
Miscalculations of this magnitude among the young are indeed cause for worry, but there is also comfort to be had at your record store. A number of CD's offering Ravel's piano music played by younger performers currently circulate, and some are quite good. The literature fits fairly neatly on two disks. Louis Lortie plays it all (Chandos CHAN 8620, 8647) as does Boris Krajny (Supraphon 11 1476-2 132). First volumes of projected complete sets are available from Philippe Bianconi (Lyrinx LYR 124) and Gordon Fergus-Thompson (ASV DCA 805). A complete set by Jacques Rouvier made in 1974 is also recirculating (Calliope CAL 9824).
Note, too, a cautionary voice from the past: Vlado Perlemuter's two-CD set on Nimbus (NI 5005, 5011). Many contemporary pianists took isolated lessons from the great man, but none deserves the title "Student of Ravel" more than Mr. Perlemuter, who was born in 1904. Ms. Dokovska could learn much from his unadorned simplicity, his refusal to milk phrases for momentary effect, in short, his insistence on letting the Classical Ravel speak for himself.
The gaudy Ravel was beyond Mr. Perlemuter when these recordings were made. Pieces like "Scarbo" retreat behind pedaled clouds of obfuscation. Even such an excellent (and much younger) musician as Mr. Fergus-Thompson -- a pianist who plays "Le Tombeau" and the "Valses Nobles et Sentimentales" with admirable calm and reflection -- struggles audibly with the extravagance of "Ondine." Likewise, Mr. Rouvier, a scrupulous French journeyman, negotiates Ravel's more difficult places with palpable apprehension.
Mr. Krajny, who was trained in Prague, offers the slowest Ravel performances this listener has ever heard. For their sheer novelty, they can be refreshing and informative, but in the long run they hardly satisfy. Whether Mr. Krajny's stately progress through the repertory is the product of esthetic conviction or practical necessity is a question left for the listener to decide.
Mr. Lortie's "Scarbo" is in startling contrast. So immense is this young Canadian's technique that he can lay open to close scrutiny, almost pedal-free, passages that other pianists are happy simply to get past. And if this seems sometimes more braggadocio than art, elsewhere Mr. Lortie produces glowing color in the "Miroirs" and shows his essential good taste in the "antique" pieces.
Mr. Lortie and Helene Mercier play Ravel duet music on Chandos CHAN 8905. "Ma Mere l'Oye" is, of course, in its original four-hand version. The "Introduction et Allegro," "Bolero" and "La Valse" are in arrangements by the composer. The transcription of "Rapsodie Espagnole" is unattributed. Here the "Mother Goose" is appropriately chaste, the rest appropriately opulent.
Mr. Bianconi's playing has an admirable elegance as well. This first volume includes the "Miroirs," the "Valses Nobles et Sentimentales" and "Gaspard de la Nuit." The young Frenchman's technique is splendid. It may lack the overpowering forcefulness of Mr. Lortie's, but his reticence at times becomes an asset. When Mr. Bianconi records the rest of this music, his set promises to be an attractive alternative or even a companion piece to Mr. Lortie's.  RECORDINGS VIEW
The cornetist Nat Adderley's sextet brings together the 1960's generation of hard-boppers, including Walt Booker on bass, Jimmy Cobb on drums, and Vincent Herring, a young fireball on alto saxophone, whose influences definitely includes Mr. Adderley's brother, Julian (Cannonball) Adderley. The group performs at Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, at Bleecker Street, (212) 242-1785, through Sunday, and next Tuesday through Sunday, with sets at 9 and 11 P.M., plus a 12:30 A.M. set Friday and Saturday nights; there is a $15 cover charge and a $10 minimum.
Michael White, a New Orleans clarinetist, tears into the traditional repertory with the Original Liberty Jazz Band at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, (212) 255-4037; sets begin tomorrow at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M. There is a $40 cover charge and a $20 minimum. And in the East Village, James (Blood) Ulmer, the electric guitarist who combines the teachings of Ornette Coleman with the rawness of electric blues, plays electrified hoedown music so down-home it's almost primeval. His annual year-end, year-starting stint at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, at Mulberry Street, (212) 219-3055, continues tomorrow night with sets at 9 P.M. and 11 P.M.; admission is $12. JON PARELES
Mr. Sinatra recorded solos in the studio. His partners, while listening later to his taped performances on earphones, dubbed in their own voices at various times from various places over distortion-free digital telephone lines. (The special lines could guarantee that the fidelity of their additions matched that of the original solo recording.) Thus, for example, Mr. Sinatra and Bono seem to be trading the verses of "I've Got You Under My Skin" while standing elbow to elbow in the same recording room. The illusion is as complete as technology can make it.
Natalie Cole used some of the same technology for her 1991 hit album, "Unforgettable, With Love," in which she sang along with the recordings of her father, the late Nat (King) Cole.
No matter how gratifying the results, however, can they be called duets? A duet implies spontaneous interaction and mutual responsiveness between two performers in each other's presence, a condition obviously not met by a recording of performers widely separated in time and space. To call the disk "Duets" seems a misnomer. Sonic collage would be a more truthful description.
This is no quibble about terms. Musical values are at stake. Recording in absentia, so to speak, has been customary for some time in pop music. A combo, say, tapes a basic track while singers or additional players superimpose their parts at some other time.
Digital techniques now make such patchwork undetectable. Yet one wonders if a jazz group, fragmented in time and space and later electronically recombined, could match the musical cohesion and spontaneity of the Benny Goodman Quintet ecstatically crowding about a single microphone to cut their old wax platters.
Concerns of this kind have so far kept remote recording out of the classical field. After all, how much lyric fervor could be mustered in "La Boheme" if Rodolfo declared his love in a New York studio and Mimi phoned in her reply three weeks later from Milan?
Another kind of technical tampering with music dates back to the first tape editor who wielded a razor blade and glue for cutting and splicing selected "takes." Sometimes this ubiquitous practice stretched the limits of legitimacy.
There were indignant critical outcries when it became known, some years ago, that Elisabeth Schwarzkopf sneaked in the high notes that Kirsten Flagstad could no longer reach when she recorded "Tristan und Isolde" late in her career. More recently, the rock group Milli Vanilli "borrowed" the voices of several unidentified singers for an award-winning disk. This was decried as unethical. But ethically speaking, is it any different from the widely tolerated practice of employing ghostwriters?
Petty fraud of this kind is not the main danger in terms of musical integrity. Rather, it is the way in which technology changes the character of a performance. Some critics feel that the modern studio practice of assembling bits and pieces drains the music of its essential flow and unity.
No less an authority than Igor Stravinsky complained in his usual mordant manner that a doctored recording "is as unlike a live performance as a painted corpse in a mortuary is unlike a living human."
Many musicians feel that a certain degree of communicative immediacy eludes them in the studio. The presence of an audience stirs more of these artists' adrenaline than the impassive attendance of the microphone. Leonard Bernstein, for example, made most of his recordings at public concerts during the later part of his career.
But it is exactly the opposite approach that has lately been gaining ground. Musicians are comforted by the knowledge that clinkers can be fixed, and this assurance inspires their performance. The avatar of this attitude was the late Glenn Gould. He gave up concerts altogether and confined all his playing to the studio, assembling superb performances from countless snippets. In his case, one might argue, the result clearly justified the method. But all too often, the studio with its editing facilities becomes a security blanket for musicians, and without it, their playing on stage tends to be cautious and timid.
Some observers of the record industry see an emerging conflict between the two approaches: the cosmetized and the unvarnished. As the critic Ethan C. Mordden observes, "The record industry has been torn between the responsibility of presenting what is true and the possibility of creating what is beautiful."
Perhaps Mr. Mordden overstates the case. After all, there are live-performance recordings that are both true and beautiful. And while technology can flatter a performer, it cannot substitute for talent.
But a few years ago, Mr. Norrington's ascent stalled, at least for a time. First there was a bout of lymphatic cancer that seems now in remission. And musically, having advanced the limits of period instruments and performance style through Beethoven and Schubert to Berlioz and even Brahms and Wagner, Mr. Norrington and his record company, EMI, arrived at an awkward juncture.
Should they push forward to the present? The steel strings in use today, so different from their gut predecessors, did not fully establish themselves until the 1930's, when the kind of swooping portamento that can be heard, say, in Elgar's recordings of his own music, was still popular.
Should they fill in the gaps in the 19th century? The notion of backtracking to period-instrument Bellini, while potentially piquant, had limited marketing appeal.
Or should they revert all the way back to the Baroque and before, where the early-music movement got started? Mr. Norrington enjoyed a singular success last fall in London with a Purcell Experience.
A look at Mr. Norrington's CD's released in the last two years, some of them made during his battle with cancer, confirms his gifts. And while it has become fashionable (especially in threatened mainstream orchestral circles) to twit period Romanticism as a fad best abandoned, Mr. Norrington's excursions into the late 19th century are just as appealing as his outings in older music.
Mozart's "Zauberflote" might have seemed a natural for Mr. Norrington, especially the folksy Papageno bits. To be sure, his recording of the opera (EMI CDCB 54287; two CD's), with brisk tempos for the solemn ritual scenes and a light-voiced Sarastro in Cornelius Hauptmann, is hardly the most Masonically mystical. Still, Mr. Norrington's personality suits the score as a whole so well, and period instruments lend the London Classical Players' work such a natural sonority, that this proves one of the opera's finest recordings. And Anthony Rolfe Johnson's earnest Tamino, Dawn Upshaw's girlish Pamina and Andreas Schmidt's full-voiced Papageno are worthy of attention.
Mr. Norrington has also recorded Mozart's "Don Giovanni" (CDCC 54859; three CD's), a work with a Romantic tradition for which his lightweight approach might have seemed less well suited. But this account is as impassioned as any in the catalogue, and better sung than most. Mr. Schmidt makes a compelling Don, darkly baritonal in timbre, gorgeous in tone, aggressively aristocratic in demeanor. The sole weakish link among the principals is Amanda Halgrimson, as Donna Anna. Lynne Dawson tears into Donna Elvira's music; Alastair Miles is a sepulchral Commendatore, and Mr. Norrington conducts as if all his years at the Kent Opera had been preparation for this moment.
Mozart's Requiem (CDC 54525), in a completion by Duncan Druce, is a little disappointing, clipped, light and only decently sung. With it come the choral "Ave Verum Corpus" and a bumpy, rushed account of the exalted Masonic Funeral Music.
In Mozart's Piano Concertos Nos. 24 and 25 (CDC 54295), the fortepianist Melvyn Tan sounds more forthright and convincing than in his sometimes fussy performances elsewhere, and Mr. Norrington renders the anguish of No. 24 with Romantic fervor. A pairing of Mozart's 38th and 40th Symphonies (CDC 54336) is a mixed bag: a choppy 38th, an intense, troubling 40th.
An anomaly among these releases is a video-only document of the 1992 Rossini birthday gala at Avery Fisher Hall (EMI LDB 40300, laser disk; 40301, videocassette). Here Mr. Norrington leads the Orchestra of St. Luke's -- a modern-instrument chamber orchestra based in New York, of which he is music director -- the Concert Chorale and a starry array of singers, including Deborah Voigt, Marilyn Horne, Frederica von Stade, Chris Merritt, Thomas Hampson and Samuel Ramey. He conducts everything a bit roughly and impersonally, coming into his own in a few solemn religious numbers. But this is really a singer's show, with Mr. Norrington as a genially professorial accompanist.
A coupling of Schubert's Fourth and Sixth Symphonies (CDC 54210) is good but not really arresting, as are the symphonies themselves. But it is in Brahms that Mr. Norrington really shines.
A Brahms symphony cycle began with the First, coupled with the "Haydn Variations" (CDC 54286). He has now recorded the Second, with the "Tragic Overture" (CDC 54875), as well as the "German Requiem" and the "Burial Song" (CDC 54658). These are all sterling performances: vigorous, lyrical and naturally balanced in a way that string-heavy modern orchestras, with the winds doubled for audibility, can never be. Brahms blossoms when treated with Classical rigor, as Toscanini showed. But Mr. Norrington reveals his tender side here, too, with nice (if still too restrained) attention to portamento. The Requiem is affectingly sung by Ms. Dawson, Olaf Bar and the Schutz Choir.
These Brahms releases suggest that despite nervous derision from the mainstream, there is reason to push period practice into the furthest reaches of the 19th century and beyond. And they suggest that Mr. Norrington, restored to health, has his best years in front of him.  RECORDINGS VIEW
"Rusalka" is civility itself. It also represents Dvorak in his prime, the "New World" Symphony of 1893 with 10 years of maturation added on. The symphony is still at the top of everyone's hit parade, but "Rusalka," with music of comparable beauty, is not. Bad luck? An accident of history? Perhaps. A colleague of mine suggests another explanation and it begins with a look at Verdi.
The subject is orchestra suites: outtakes from operas like "Carmen" or "Der Rosenkavalier" that have been reassembled for concert performances and as such work very nicely. Where are the suites from Verdi's operas? We have the wonderful overtures but they seem about the closest we get.
Perhaps it is because suites imply separations: coherent chunks of musical experience removed from the stage and given artificial beginnings and endings. Try doing that to Verdi. This is a horizontal composer, bent always toward the next dramatic connection. The story of "I Lombardi" may make no sense, but the progress of its music is logic itself. Aria, recitative and ensemble rush headlong after one another. Verdi's music lives for his characters, not for itself. It has cadences and closures, but until the curtain goes down the listener never feels at rest. Verdi in motion will not be pinned down.
Dvorak's operatic music stops regularly. It comes in a series of boxes, each carefully filled, sealed and tied. These lovely little containers are like movements assembled in suite form, with scenery and costumes added. If we close our eyes it is all very beautiful, but is it opera? Opera demands connections, a palpable bond between one dramatic gesture and the next. Dvorak offers instead a certain quietude, a stasis. Each musical scene comes to a close with such symphonic finality that we relax. We lose the thread. It's comforting to blame fate and injustice for the relative obscurity of "Rusalka." But there are other reasons, more substantial ones.
Berlioz understood opera as well as Verdi did. The sheer girth of "Les Troyens" can be crushing, but the restless meter changes, the prodding sense of exploration, the willing abandonment of form and symmetry -- all produce music that pursues people on stage from event to event. If we are sometimes maddened by Berlioz's obsession with completeness, we have that superb sense of motion and a wonderful way of making specific instruments create specific moods to pull us through.
And if these three operas have not created enough trouble for themselves this fall, there was also the Robert Wilson-Tom Waits "Black Rider" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, a subversive little exercise in post-modern folklore that undermines a long-assumed privilege of opera and its lovers to be as unreasonable and implausible as they choose to be.
What alarms us about "The Black Rider" is that more than a few of the hilarious moments in it, if lifted in toto and deposited in a standard production of its implied prototype, "Der Freischutz," might be accepted at face value: as something solemn in the best operatic tradition. Weber's ancient forests and magic bullets are being trashed with considerable subtlety, and along with them, the longstanding opera house agreement whereby listeners accept questionable theatrical plausibility in exchange for unquestionably beautiful music. "The Black Rider" voids the transaction. Operatic earnestness is taken to the brink of the absurd and pushed over into pratfall and slapstick.
Mr. Wilson and company are doing what a lot of other creative people these days do: put something old in a new place and see what happens. Weber and "The Black Rider" do have things in common: first a ballad-driven style and second, synthesized exaggerations of vocal sounds that make splendid metaphors for the outsize operatic voice. What is different is the way Mr. Wilson lets operatic convention off its leash and sends it racing toward a collision with common sense. Common sense, especially in a fragile flower like "Der Freischutz," finds itself in an unfriendly and unprotected place.
On grounds of coherence, Verdi's addled trip to the Crusades in "I Lombardi" is similarly difficult to defend; the hugeness of "Les Troyens" implies a madness of its own. In opera, one demands reasonableness at one's peril. Threaten it with too much logic and it shrivels and dies.
In the case of Leo Brouwer's "El Decameron Negro," not very well at all. One quickly lost patience with its wan invention and wandering descriptive style. It is no coincidence, I think, that during these three pieces respiratory misadventure among Saturday's listeners reached its loudest and most intrusive.
In the case of Federico Garcia Lorca's "Cinco canciones espanolas antiguas," arrestingly well. The poet and playwright also sang and played, and these songs, never written down, were recorded by him and subsequently transcribed. They have a rough, dirt-under-the-fingernails charm and an assymetrical delivery that owes much to the theater. They also provided a nice antidote to the occasional preciousness offered by Francisco Tarrega and Agustin Barrios. So too did the vivacious samba beat of Isaias Savio's "Batucada."
Ms. Isbin is a guitarist of extraordinary thoroughness. The technique is complete and the use of rubato calculated with taste and subtlety. Ms. Valente's soprano has aged gracefully, even if that silvery quality is now less in evidence. The two musicians share a certain elegance and make an apt pair. If neither can quite be as barbarous as their material sometimes asks them to be, Ms. Isbin's fastidiousness and Ms. Valente's relative demureness have rewards of their own.
The Ivy League side of Ms. Gerson is owed to the fact that she recently graduated from Princeton, where she studied Jewish existentialism. Although her songs have literary echoes ("Kalypsos and Widows" most obviously, with its references to "The Odyssey"), most are far from bookish. In a characteristic lyric, the singer faces down a miserable, scary world by declaring her feelings firmly and in a style that avoids the wispier, more ethereal side of folk music.
"Evil Sex Queen," one of the two strongest numbers she performed on Friday, is a full-tilt, blues-flavored harangue against the poisonous stereotyping of women in music videos. The more reflective "Roof Jumping," confronts suicide and a family plagued with alcoholism and drug addiction. "Evil Sex Queen," which rides along on a twangy "Peter Gunn"-like beat, tested the limits of Ms. Gerson's medium-size folk-rock voice. In the song's declamatory passages, she displayed a stamina that found her confidently treading the line between folk and rock.
With Schumann's Fantasy -- potentially a showpiece -- this approach yielded unpredictable results. Mr. Lupu made this music seem genuinely weird, which it often is. Schumann gave the work an epigram from Schlegel referring to the sounds of a "multicolored earthly dream" in which could be heard a gentle strain "aimed at one who listens in secret." Mr. Lupu seemed to play for that secret listener -- himself -- and while his palette was coloristically limited, he often evoked a dream. He deliberately pulled away from subsidiary climaxes, ignoring Schumann's dynamic markings, creating a piquant sense of drift.
But there are limitations to this approach. Schumann wanted the effect of interiority in this music, but his fantastical musings have a more demonstrative aspect as well. The work, with allusions to Beethoven, is a public fantasy, not just a private dream. It is full of declamation. While Mr. Lupu could be appropriately grand now and then, the effect was odd. He would shift into public mode for a few moments, then, with the musical equivalent of a shrug, return to private reflections, which were sometimes surprisingly muddled and unclear.
During the first half of the program, when this approach was applied to Bartok's Suite (Op. 14) and Schubert's Opus 142 Impromptus, the playing was even more peculiar, verging on mannerism. Mr. Lupu seemed intent on creating fantasy even when none could be found. The Bartok work, which should be wild, rhythmically incisive and full of playful surprises, was unshaped, almost a casual meditation; the Schubert impromptus had some fine moments, but the point seemed to be to avoid any sense of tension in the midst of the music's repetitions. These vastly different pieces sounded similar in character; often they were ungrounded, precious, solipsistic. There were occasions, too, when Mr. Lupu's technique seemed almost too relaxed for the music's good.
The program consistently improved as it went along, as if Mr. Lupu was gradually settling into his idiosyncratic pianistic world. Some listeners stood and cheered at what he accomplished; others were clearly bored by his refusal to engage in narrative drama. For this listener, exasperation gradually gave way to exhilaration. Such is the nature of fantasy.

Friday at 8 P.M., the jazz guitarist Doug Proper adds his riffs to more readings by two poets, Billy Collins and Suzanne Cleary, while the offerings on Saturday include a 2 P.M. session of "songs and stories for families" with John Farrell, and at 3:30, the Appletree Production of "Jack and the Beanstalk."
Looking to the first weekend in February, the Schoolhouse agenda includes an 8 P.M. Friday recital by the wife-husband duo of the violinist Zaida Booth and the pianist Robert Levin, listing works of Corelli, Bartok and Beethoven. A performance on Saturday at 2 P.M. of "Hans Brinker or the Silver Skates" introduces the newly formed Young Performers Ensemble of the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts, and at 8 P.M., there is "Avant New Age Jazz" with the composers Doug Munro and Bill Smith.
All these concert and theatrical presentations are complemented by gallery exhibitions of sculpture, painting and weaving done by local artists. For more details or concert reservations, call 277-8477.
Several other Westchester artists are appearing this week, among them the New Rochelle pianist Adam Kent, last year's winner of the American Pianists Association Auditions. His recital today at 2 P.M. at the Community Unitarian Church of White Plains highlights music of Grieg, Schumann, Chopin, Rachmaninoff and William Bolcom. Call 946-1660 for more information.
At 3 P.M. today, the Hackley Chamber Music Series continues at the Hackley School in Tarrytown. The pianist Liliane Questel will play the Debussy Sonata with the violinist Nick Eanet, the gorgeous Rachmaninoff Sonata with the cellist Marcy Rosen and, with both of her colleagues, Beethoven's "Ghost" Trio. Tickets will be available at the door.
When the Hudson Valley Music Club presents its first program of the year, tomorrow at 2 P.M. at its 54 Clinton Avenue headquarters in Dobbs Ferry, several county artists should be in attendance. The program, titled "January Jazz," begins with a jazz-influenced classical piece -- the Ravel Violin and Piano Sonata -- played by Peggy Klinger and Judith Soffer, residents of Chappaqua and Katonah, respectively. Then comes a group of Gershwin songs sung by Susan Segall of Irvington, and after that the Fox Lane Jazz Combo offers a selection of pop standards. For reservations or more information about the music club, call 591-6434.
Jazz is also the focus of Jay Hoggard, the master vibraphonist, who gives a solo concert today at 3 P.M. at Wave Hill in Riverdale. Call (718) 549-3200 for travel directions.
Two concerts next Saturday are also for jazz lovers. The "Jazz It Up" series starts at 3 P.M. at the New Rochelle Library, when Victor La Gamma leads the Greater Apple Ensemble. Call 632-7878 for more information. And at 8 P.M., the pianist McCoy Tyner plays a solo concert to conclude the Jazz Series at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck. Call 698-0098 for information.
In other recital activity this week, the organist Patricia Waters plays in the Downtown Music at Grace cycle, her program on Wednesday at 12:35 P.M. at the Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains offering transcriptions of pieces originally written for piano by Grainger, Granados, Gershwin and -- just to break the alliterative pattern -- Amy Beach. Call 277-4419 for information.
Next Sunday at 2:30 P.M., the soprano Sabrina Kass-Lipton and the pianist Robert Marcum give a free concert at the White Plains Public Library, their repertory ranging from grand opera to musical theater. Call 422-1400, extension 1493 for more information.
Two string programs take place next Sunday at 3 P.M. Concertgoers can choose between a recital by the young Russsian-American violinist Dmitri Berlinksy at the Emelin Theater in Mamroneck (698-0098) and a program of Beethoven, Bartok and Dvorak by the Tokyo String Quartet at Purchase College (251-6200).
Yet another 3 P.M. option next Sunday is a family concert at the Rye Arts Center, presented by the musicians who make up the Manor House Wind Quintet. Not only will Sylvia Lipnik, Eric Stand, Michael Lacker, Rosemary Waltzer and Mary Olson offer youngsters an introduction to their instruments -- oboe, flute, clarinet, horn and bassoon, respectively -- but they will also welcome Janna Goodspeed as the narrator for Prokofiev's "Peter and the Wolf." Call 967-0700 for more information.
The husband-wife duo of Edward and Virginia Brewer, harpsichordist and oboist, respectively, will be appearing in a recital next Sunday at 4 P.M. at St. Mark's Episcopal Church in Mount Kisco. The mostly Baroque program lists works of Bach, Scarlatti, Handel and Telemann along with one of their forgotten contemporaries, Johann Christian Schickhardt, and the equally obscure (except possibly to oboists) 18th-century French composer Antoine de Lavigne. Call 666-5719 for more information.
Although most choirs will greet new members with open arms, three have sent out specific audition calls: the Pleasantville Cantata Singers, the Westchester Chorale and the Westchester Choral Society.
In Pleasantville, tryouts are scheduled in the United Methodist Church at 7:30 P.M. (half an hour ahead of the regular rehearsal time), with the Dvorak Mass in D and Bernstein's "Chichester Psalms" on the agenda; for an appointment, call 769-2314 or 769-2658.
The Westchester Chorale has set its auditions for the next two Tuesday evenings beginning 7:45 at Oussani Hall in Scared Heart Roman Catholic Church in Dobbs Ferry, the main difference here being that prospective members are invited to join the rehearsal first and try out afterward. Vaughan Williams "Dona Nobis Pacem" and the Faure Requiem are on the spring performance list. The information numbers are 965-1679 or 969-5786.
And the Choral Society (which performs Bernstein's "Chichester Psalms" and Orff's "Carmina Burana" today at 3 P.M. at Purchase College) invites prospective members to try out at 7 P.M. on any of the next three Tuesday evenings at the Westchester Conservatory in White Plains. "No vocal training or choral experience is necessary" is the good news here. For more details, call 761-4714.  MUSIC
Musically, their languages are not as dissimilar as one might think. Each pushed the limits of tonality and showed how elastic those limits are. And they both understood that in the right context, ugliness can be beautiful, even moving.
The Emerson made that point clearly in the first half of the concert. In Beethoven's Quartet in A minor (Op. 132), composed during an illness and convalescence in 1825, they pointed up the anxiety in the early movements by keeping their tone slightly acidic and maintaining a current of impatience just below the surface, even in the passages in which reflection and transcendence offset the music's tensions and angularity.
The central "Heiliger Dankgesang" movement commemorates the passing of a crisis, and although one could argue (as many quartets do) that the crisis should be over before this movement of thanksgiving begins, the Emerson presented an alternative view. Here, the return to life took place as the music unfolded. The sustained tones of the recurring hymn theme were first played virtually without vibrato, and with a touch of sourness that suggested a period-instrument performance of earlier church music. Gradually, the ensemble's sound grew richer and its coloration warmer, setting the stage for Beethoven's shift from the minor mode to the major for the final movements.
The Shostakovich Quartet No. 13 in B flat minor (Op. 138) is more compact and in some ways more dramatic, if only because it lacks the cheerful resolution of the Beethoven. Like many of Shostakovich's most personal works, it draws its energy from an intense bitterness, sometimes expressed as unadorned violence (slashing, dissonant chords) and sometimes in sarcasm (a jazz parody that grows increasingly grotesque).
Lawrence Dutton, the ensemble's violist, set the tone of the work with a nuanced reading of the desolate solo viola line that opens the work. His colleagues, Philip Setzer and Eugene Drucker, violinists, and David Finckel, cellist, took up the Shostakovich's plaint with equal passion, and the group's impeccable balance and blend made the finale especially chilling.
After the intermission, the players turned to Beethoven's B-flat Quartet (Op. 130). The first five movements were an antidote to the tensions of the first half: the music is more mercurial and light spirited, and the Emerson made the most of its vibrancy. Not surprisingly, they chose the Grosse Fuge rather than the less-ambitious alternate ending. And in the fugue, with its dark, stressed theme and its sometimes chaotic textures, the quartet glanced back both at the less rosy view of life embodied in the Shostakovich, and at the faith that life will prevail that animates Beethoven's Opus 132.
The final concert in the Emerson's series is on Feb. 26.
Mr. Taylor opened the show with a band that featured Karen Bourque-Simmons on vocals and had electric keyboards, electric bass and drums. The last half of the set had a few nice ideas, as when Mr. Taylor mixed a Scottish folk song with a jazz ostinato, but the music stuck mostly to a pleasant, mildly inspired path.
Mr. Clark, with a band featuring Gil Goldstein on keyboards, Kenny Davis on bass and Kenwood Dennard on drums, kept close to pop and rhythm-and-blues, with some written material adding structure to the pieces. Mr. Clark has a warm sound and a fluency, and his improvisations worked their way easily through the material. Toward the end of the set he was joined by Earl Gardner on trumpet, Dave Taylor on bass trombone and Billy Harper on tenor saxophone to perform "Mustang Sally" with richly harmonized riffs breaking up solos. Mr. Harper, with his blues authority, tore the tune apart while Dave Taylor let loose great flutters of sound when he played alone.
Mr. Chancey ended the show by playing two tunes with Latin rhythms, along with Herbie Hancock's "Cantaloupe Island," perhaps a reference to the current pop hit "Cantaloop" by the English rap group Us3, which uses a riff to the tune. Mr. Chauncey was the most dramatic of the improvisers, with big interval leaps and silences underscoring his ideas. His context, again a sleepy pop-jazz hybrid, didn't do him justice, and as with much of the music on the show, the audience had to pick out the occasional improvisations that might justify listening to the music at all.
Mr. Copeland, one of rock's most original drummers, pushes a song forward with meticulous syncopations, placing quick, sharp accents -- a snare-drum rimshot, a flicker of small cymbal -- where they will spark the beat. His drumming is muscular but light, alluding to jazz, reggae and other styles outside rock. In the Rhythmatists' songs, the most familiar undercurrents were from reggae and funk, but Mr. Copeland was also at home in loping, chattering neo-African hybrids. Playing with a stage full of percussionists, he kept the music limber and uncluttered; he seemed to enjoy listening as much as playing.
But the concert's central figure was Vinx, an American who comes across as a combination of Bobby McFerrin and Olatunji. He introduced other musicians and performed solos during the first half of the show, then shared lead vocals (with Ray Lema, a keyboardist from Zaire) in the Rhythmatists.
Vinx is a remarkable musician who can croon in an ardent, enfolding baritone while tapping intricate, shifting patterns on hand drum. Usually, he would sing a slow, sustained melody, like "My Funny Valentine," while dividing and and subdividing the time; the melancholy disappeared in the musicianly feat. During the second half of the concert, the Guinean drummers joined him in one song, sharing and amplifying the double-time pulse.
The songs Mr. Lema sang leaned toward African rock, with two-chord vamps behind long, zig-zagging melodies and harmony choruses; after Mr. Lema sang a melody, Vinx sometimes answered him with jazzy scat-singing. Mr. Heredia was nearly lost in the sound mix with the band; as a soloist, he used flamenco techniques -- rapid-fire strums and arpeggios, steely tremolo picking -- to elevate unexceptional compositions. Les Percussions offered pure rhythm, exuberant six-beat and eight-beat workouts in which soloists stepped forward to play their own cross-timed salvos.
Uakti was the least traditional of the concert's components. Its three members played a menagerie of instruments, from conventional flute to homemade marimba and glockenspiel to racks of plastic tubes that became tuned drums. Parts of Uakti's pieces were purely textural -- showing off, for instance, the eerie sound of a man-sized rotating cylinder played with a kind of bow, like an enlarged hurdy-gurdy. Other sections were plinking, percussive ostinatos in odd meters, like Steve Reich vacationing in Brazil. Uakti has obviously spent a lot of time listening to sonic possibilities; the audience delighted in the results.
Mr. Mehta has some history with the "Resurrection." He conducted the New York Philharmonic in it several times, using it in 1982 to celebrate the orchestra's 10,000th concert and leading the finale in 1986 at Carnegie's post-renovation opening. That performance was later televised, and his performance with the Israel Philharmonic at Massada two years later is available on video tape.
The slightly distant, rational approach he took on Tuesday was not inconsistent with his past accounts. And at the risk of being accused of treating performances as if they were baseball cards, it is impossible for anyone who heard Leonard Bernstein conduct this work (or any of the Mahler symphonies) to suppress those memories and avoid making comparisons. Bernstein's freedom in twisting and extending phrases may have seemed excessive at times, but there was also a point to it, and more crucially, it made the music envelop the listener totally.
That said, Mr. Mehta's more detached approach had its merits. By letting the listener stand apart from the work's currents of tragedy and elation, turmoil and redemption, it allowed the space to ponder aspects that might not come to mind during a more involving performance. One could wonder, for example, whether Mahler was ever actually young. He started this work when he was 28 and finished it six years later, yet questions about mortality already weigh heavily on him, and the first section of the score he completed was originally called "Totenfeier" ("Funeral Rites").
There was also time to consider the evolution of Mahler's style. In purely technical terms, there is a great distance between this early score and the Ninth Symphony, but many of the hallmarks -- coloristic blends, thematic turns, juxtapositions of mood -- are already here. And philosophically, this is almost a day in the country. Here, in the two final movements, Mahler affirms his belief in life after death. In the dejection of the Ninth, he seems less sure.
These wanderings were not enough to deflect attention from the inconsistencies in the performance. Mr. Mehta began with an appealingly taut reading of the opening pages. But as the textures thickened, mishaps in the brass, a strident string sound and a general lack of finesse took their toll. The later movements were better played and better balanced. There was some lovely wind playing in the third movement, and the brass redeemed themselves spectacularly in the finale.
Florence Quivar brought a velvety beauty to the "Urlicht" movement, and Janet Williams's contributions to the finale had nearly the right air of mystery as her lines emerged from the smooth, warm-toned sound produced by the New York Choral Artists.
The Mannes College of Music likes to show off its students and faculty in public concerts now and then. Michael Charry, who teaches conducting at the college and directs its orchestra, led his ensemble in an ambitious program on Monday evening, and if the performances were sometimes flawed, there were rewards as well.
Chief among these was Donald Erb's colorful, harmonically ambiguous fantasy on the Apocalypse, "The Seventh Trumpet." Mr. Erb filled this 1969 work with effects of all kinds, from slides and sighs to cartoonish wind sounds, aggressive brass bursts and a swarming sound created by fingernails tapping on instruments. Mr. Charry's young players responded enthusiastically, executing the effects without losing sight of the work's underlying narrative line.
They were less at ease in more conventional music. In sections from Prokofiev's "Romeo and Juliet" and in the Brahms Fourth Symphony, lovely stretches of playing were regularly marred by poor intonation and tentative attacks.  ALLAN KOZINN
If there is a compelling reason to perform four hours' worth of top-drawer Bach organ music in one evening, it did not emerge in Anthony Newman's "Bach 'Til Midnight" program on Wednesday. Mr. Newman played 24 large preludes (some of them toccatas, fantasies or the famous Passacaglia) and fugues, and threw in four chorale preludes for good measure. (Too bad he skipped "Wachet auf," which would have found some slumbering customers in the last set.)
The evening took on the character of an endurance test, at least for the dwindling audience. Around 10:30, it became apparent that even the relatively sturdy listeners who remained could no longer tell a prelude from a fugue, when applause broke in after the great F-major Toccata (S. 540).
Mr. Newman, for his part, seemed tireless. Presumably it was he, invisible behind the console in the sanctuary the whole time. But no, it had to be Mr. Newman, the fastest gun this side of Virgil Fox's grave; few other organists could (or would want to) produce performances of such haste. Indeed, if the whole program had to be played at once, one listener would gladly have stayed a half-hour longer to allow Mr. Newman to air out his tempos a bit, letting the music breathe and speak more clearly.
He traversed the myriad notes with remarkable facility and accuracy, adding ornaments and the odd flourish or cadenza with gusto and flair. But he often neglected to shape phrases, letting the rhythmic pulse submerge in a headlong blur.  JAMES R. OESTREICH
But as fine as that recording remains, it pales by comparison with the live performance. Mr. Holzmair's attractive overall sonority has evidently taken on greater color, subtlety and depth with maturity. Here the singer began with the same forthright spirit as on the disk, but even from the start he encompassed a much broader emotional range.
As the wandering youth of the tale comes to realize that his love for the beautiful miller-maid is vain, the texts grow lonely and bitter; an almost frightful wildness crept into Mr. Holzmair's manner. In "Der Jager," where the youth recognizes his rival, the singer's tone grew hunted and haunted, breathless and veiled. In "Die Bose Farbe," he captured the text with astonishing literalness, blanching "evil" color and much of the pitch quality from his voice, covering all with the specified "deathly white" pall.
The final consolation was no less convincing, the voice regaining its basic timbre but sounding weary and worn, as the rigors of the evening, both dramatic and physical, would demand.
Mr. Holzmair's sense of dramatic and vocal scale was ideal for the medium and the intimate space; his voice sounded wonderfully hearty on the whole. Rare instances of splintered tone or unfocused pitch were small price to pay for the sorts of expressive risks he took throughout.
And his enunciation was everywhere a marvel. Time after time, a distinctly uttered final consonant would appear on schedule, long after a listener accustomed to the slovenly routine of contemporary singers had given up expecting it.
Mr. Palm appeared reticent at first, failing to provide all the contrast and detail Mr. Holzmair's strong projection might have allowed. But the performances soon came to seem an integral whole, with Mr. Palm's quiet yet unfailing strength giving Mr. Holzmair the freedom to roam boldly.
Indeed, the interpretation as a whole proved so rounded and complete, with such a strong sense of closure, that the very notion of an encore seemed superfluous and unwelcome. But Mr. Holzmair indulged the loudly appreciative audience with a brief, sensible choice, the "Wandrers Nachtlied" (D. 768), and delivered it with a sensitivity that implausibly enhanced the earlier achievement.
Mr. Gaisford is an agile player for whom the chromatic thickets and quick passagework in the Debussy and Prokofiev seem to hold no terrors. His arsenal also includes a warm, centered tone and an ear for color, which together made for seductive accounts of these four melody-driven works.
Yet a listener wished Mr. Gaisford had sought greater variety in his programming. At his impressive debut recital in 1988, he also played the Rachmaninoff Sonata, but he offset it with the more acerbic Shostakovich Sonata. The Prokofiev might have been a similar foil here, but Mr. Gaisford focused on its autumnal, lyrical qualities. So as vibrant and musicianly as his rendering of the Rachmaninoff was, by the time he reached it, at the end of the program, the cultivated sweetness and intensity of his sound had begun to seem slightly cloying.
All four works demand considerable interplay between the cellist and the pianist, and Mr. Gaisford's collaborator, Nelson Padgett, found the right balance between support and assertiveness, and held up his side of the transaction admirably. ALLAN KOZINN
The Scholars sang first the plainchant "Veni Creator Spiritus" and then Palestrina's Mass loosely based on it. For all the variety in individual lines, the singers achieved a unity and purity that remain astonishing even to a longtime follower of the group. They added some shorter Palestrina numbers in the second half, ending with a captivating "Magnificat Septimi Toni."
But they began the second half with a fillip, Gregorio Allegri's famous "Miserere," with four singers placed invisibly behind the altar, including a gloriously soaring soprano, Deborah Roberts. And in an encore, they paid tribute to another master who died 400 years ago, Orlandus Lassus, presenting a motet, "Ave Regina Coelorum." Its final chord, beautifully pointed and placed, utterly solid yet transparent and sonorous, epitomized the Scholars' approach overall. JAMES R. OESTREICH
He has a contract with Philips Classics that promises future releases of important operas like "Prince Igor," "The Fiery Angel" and "Sadko," which will join his already distinguished list of recordings.
All of this attention is well deserved. When I heard Mr. Gergiyev conduct the Kirov Orchestra last season, I was struck by the traditional Russian quality of the sound: the thick, sonorous strings and the broad melodic lines. Leading the New York Philharmonic, Mr. Gergiyev created a dramatically different effect, recalling the meticulous craftsmanship and classical temperament of Mravinsky. This was also unmistakably modern playing: clean, unsentimental and transparent.
In an entire concert of program music, this made for some curious results. The approach didn't work as well in Berlioz's Orchestral Selections from "Romeo and Juliet" (Op. 17), where a more loose-limbed attitude to character and personality would have been more effective. Instead, the result was almost too abstract; the Scherzo was fascinating but full of eerie juxtapositions. This piece wasn't about Romeo or Juliet; in this interpretation, it was about a series of motifs and timbres.
Perhaps because it was a more scenic and atmospheric piece, the suite from Rimsky-Korsakov's "Legend of the Invisible City of Kitezh," was more intriguing. Despite the score's opening birdcalls and forest murmurs, Mr. Gergiyev did not treat this as program music. It was not a narrative, telling a story; nor was it pictorial, evoking the composer's images ("Bridal Procession"; "Invasion of the Tartars").
Instead, the work sounded like a meditation, unfolding in a state of detached reflection and determined calm. While the music sometimes drifted, it also shimmered under the conductor's attention. In St. Petersburg, Mr. Gergiyev led a festival devoted to Rimsky-Korsakov's neglected operas; if that festival could be reproduced here, it would be a major contribution to New York's musical life.
But it was in the Mussorgsky work, with its precisely articulated portraits, that Mr. Gergiyev was most successful, dissecting the score while creating a sense of its expansive unfolding.
The movement from the solemn intonations of the Catacombs to the close of the work was not simply a stroll down a portrait gallery, as Mussorgsky's program has it. It had the character of a spiritual awakening, passing through death and the grotesque clamoring of "The Hut on Fowl's Legs" to the mounting epiphanies of "The Great Gate of Kiev." Remarkably, after the final cadence, that gate seemed not closed but open with anticipation.
If "merely" is the word for two such imposing creations. The Schnittke entry was "Seid Nuchtern und Wachet" ("Be Sober and Watchful"), a cantata from 1983 on the Faust story, or rather its sorry conclusion. Perhaps taking his cue from Thomas Mann's novel "Doctor Faustus," Mr. Schnittke uses a folk-based German text from 1587, published by Johann Shpiece, in which stern moralizing is buttressed by a lurid account of Faust's fate. (". . . The chamber was splattered with blood./His brain was clinging to the wall,/Because the devil had flung him/From one wall to the other.")
Mr. Schnittke's compelling work (since expanded into an opera) begins as a parody Passion, with tenor narrator, baritone protagonist and countertenor tempter. But it takes a bizarre turn in the grisly denouement, when a husky, vampish mezzo-soprano picks up the tale to a grim and relentless tango beat.
Joyce Castle, crooning her way through the aisles with a hand-held microphone, delivered the knockout blow to harrowing effect. Michael Hayes was an earnest narrator, Jan Opalach an affecting Faust, Derek Lee Ragin an unearthly beguiler. The Concert Chorale of New York joined the orchestra, and Mr. Botstein kept a tight rein on the sprawling affair.
Miss Gubaidulina's "Allelujia," too, offered an extramusical conceit, a light show, but it was overshadowed not only by the grandly theatrical gesture at the heart of the Schnittke but also by Miss Gubaidulina's powerful score. Or at least powerful music, for the use of colored lights is fully specified in the score and meant to be integral to the work.
Be that as it may, earlier performances have done without lights, and even this lighted premiere was termed experimental by the composer in a preconcert discussion. The notion, evidently, is to enhance the mystic character of the quasi-religious text with ambient lighting of varying hues and intensities. The American Symphony, unable to command and transform the hall for the purpose, gamely constructed a "color organ," a system of spotlights onstage, activated by a keyboard.
The results were anticlimactic and distracting. Until Miss Gubaidulina's conception can be realized in full (and maybe even then), the music is better heard neat.
People were there to dance, and two or three songs into the show the audience was on its feet and in the aisles. The band played hit after hit ("The Way You Do the Things You Do," "Can't Help Falling in Love"), and the audience sang along.
US3, a rap band from England, opened the show. The group is distinctive in that it uses samples, often taken from the records on the Blue Note jazz label, and reproduces the sound of those samples with a live band. At times the idea worked; the saxophonist Ed Jones can improvise, and over a live bassist and drummer, his improvisations provided the hottest moments of the show. But US3's material is weak and the live presentation often a shambles, and the audience response was almost negligible.
The ranks of the atonal apostates continue to swell. Barbara Kolb stopped short of apologizing, in a preconcert conversation on Thursday evening, for what she called her "convoluted" style of yore. But she harked back fondly to her father's work as a jazz pianist and said, "I think I've had my share of being serious."
Her "All in Good Time," commissioned for the Philharmonic's 150th anniversary and given its premiere to start the concert, is indeed jazzy at times, and not terribly serious. String harmonies accumulate in overlapping waves, give way to episodes heavy with saxophone and percussion, then return in Minimalist frozen motion: mildly diverting, little more.
Leonard Slatkin and the orchestra gave good accounts of this and of Vaughan Williams's Second Symphony. The symphony's intensely quiet passages were especially impressive, as was the hushed opening of Sibelius's Violin Concerto, with Joshua Bell as soloist.
But Mr. Bell seemed preoccupied with momentary contrasts, making every bow shift a momentous event. Although his flash and dazzle drew cheers from the audience, he scarcely plumbed the work's ample depths.
The concert will be repeated this evening at Tilles Center in Brookville, L.I., and on Tuesday at Avery Fisher Hall. JAMES R. OESTREICH
Mr. Shaheen's presence, and his musical authority, changed everything during the second half. The musicians began playing music associated with urban areas, and it became more complicated and more percussive. He and Mr. Racy opened with a composition of Mr. Racy's that used harmony, and the two musicians swapped unaccompanied improvisations until they both moved into composed sections. Mr. Shaheen brought out his oud, and he and Mr. Racy were joined by the percussionist Michel Merhej. The music, more rhythmic, moved from tense rubato sections to driving, powerful improvisations. The rest of the performers came out and the music became orchestral, with Mr. Ajami singing wave after wave of surging melody, only to be answered by the instrumentalists. Riffs pealed; the music, tough and lush, built and built as it tried to take the audience away with it.
In the ensemble's New York debut on Sunday evening, Tiziano Severini conducted a program that kept the orchestra's solidity and youthful energy in the spotlight. It also showed the pervasiveness of the international style: anyone hoping to identify a peculiarly Northern Italian sound would have had to strain the imagination. The almost aggressively bright wind playing in Rossini's "Scala di Seta" Overture came closest to being a hallmark, but for the most part the orchestra's tone and Mr. Severini's balances and phrasing were unremarkable.
Leon Bates was the soloist in the Schumann Piano Concerto, and although he began tentatively, he gave a poetic account of the Intermezzo and summoned the fire necessary for the finale. Mendelssohn's "Italian" Symphony would have benefited from a lighter touch and more transparent textures but was otherwise a respectably lively reading. And the orchestra's strings played Bruno Bettinelli's Inventions (1939) -- a work similar in language and spirit to some of Samuel Barber's music of the time -- with warmth and intensity. ALLAN KOZINN
Mr. Byron can stop a room cold with his drama, and on several unaccompanied sections, his tone full and his pitch precise, he spread out an emotionally pungent melody. And he produced astonishing, taut lines, tightly woven and rhythmically powerful. The band, consisting of David Gilmore on guitar, Uri Caine on piano, Kenny Davis on bass and Marvin (Smitty) Smith, wrestled with the material, which at times had the studiousness of chamber music despite all Mr. Byron's efforts to make it raucous. It was that tension exactly, between the desire to break up the place and the music's constraints, that made the music almost uncomfortable, unsure of what it was or what it wanted to be.
Consider what she accomplishes in this opera as an 18th-century actress in the Comedie-Francaise who is caught in an otherwise unremarkable love triangle. In the third act, the character declaims a speech from Racine in front of her rival. Ms. Freni followed an option offered by the composer, reciting rather than singing the initial lines. She spoke with a biting intensity until the barely contained passion broke through into fortissimo pitches, delivered like daggers into the air.
Later, in the final act, as Adriana is dying, she imagines herself as the muse of tragedy. Here Ms. Freni reined in her voice, turning it frail and delicate, punctuating the phrases with breaths and dying falls. The effect of the final act, in fact, was heightened by the contrasts between the muscular vigor of her earlier singing and the shades of melancholy and longing that colored her later expressions.
Throughout the evening, there were signs of Ms. Freni's senior status on the vocal scene: a few slides up to pitches and some excessive vibrato in the often plundered aria, "Io son l'umile ancella." Such hints of experience are to be expected in a role that has often been adopted by sopranos toward the end of their careers. Ms. Freni, though, is nowhere near the end of hers. Her reserves of power, her finely tuned precision and her overarching intelligence raised expectations for many more opportunities to hear her humane artistry. The audience offered her a standing ovation.
She was part of an often impressive ensemble. Making his debut with the company, Roberto Abbado (Claudio's nephew), the principal conductor of the Munich Radio Orchestra, proved a subtle and sensitive conductor, following the singers with a light touch, giving a charming accompaniment to the opera's ballet (newly choreographed by Robert LaFosse), and never neglecting the music's atmospheric ambitions, particularly in the ominous pulsings that open the fourth act.
As Michonnet, the aging stage manager who has long hidden his love from Adriana, Sherrill Milnes was a tender yet sturdy presence, his voice large without ever seeming loud. Stefania Toczyska also made a strong impression as the Princess, her mezzo voice taking on a metallic coloration and penetrating thrust that might have been a liability elsewhere but was well-suited to this role. James Courtney was an effective Prince, Bernard Fitch a slightly mischievous Abbe. Less convincing was the portrayal of Maurizio: as the object of so much passionate attention by the ladies, the role requires a voice with more character and suppleness than Luis Lima's. His tenor seemed bloodless and unnuanced, particularly in the duets with Ms. Freni.
This production of "Adriana Lecouvreur" dates to 1963, when Renata Tebaldi sang the leading role, and was last seen in 1983. It has been restaged by Lesley Koenig for these performances, and it is still more than serviceable. Its main peculiarity is the elimination of any contrasts in the sets' styles; they all seem to portray the habitats of the nobility while the work itself veers between verismo and buffa styles, setting up an opposition between the modern world of the stage and the declining world of the old order. But there was little need for spectacle or for any attempt to interpret. No need for anything, in fact. Ms. Freni earned the undistracted attention of the eyes as well as the ears. Adriana Lecouvreur  Opera in four acts by Francesco Cilea, libretto by Arturo Colautti, after the play by Eugene Scribe and Ernest Legouve; conductor, Roberto Abbado; staged by Leslie Koenig; sets by C. M. Cristini; costumes by Ray Diffen; lighting by Gil Wechsler; choreography by Robert LaFosse. At the Metropolitan Opera. Adriana . . . Mirella Freni Princess de Bouillon . . . Stefania Toczyska Maurizio . . . Luis Lima Michonnet . . . Sherrill Milnes Mlle. Jouvenot . . . Yvonne Gonzales Mlle. Dangeville . . . Jane Shaulis Abbe de Chazeuil . . . Bernard Fitch Poisson . . . Tony Stevenson Prince de Bouillon . . . James Courtney Quinault . . . Kevin Short Major-Domo . . . Mitchell Sendrowitz
A sensitivity reaching to the back chairs of the string sections lifts phrases in the air. They are played in long breaths. Separated notes come apart almost reluctantly. This orchestra is the master, if not the inventor, of the nachschlagende accent, that insinuating after-swell manifesting power without brutality.
As Central and Eastern Europeans successively adopt the brass and wind instruments of international orchestras and ape the international love of brilliance, the Vienna sticks to its own oboes and horns and draws its players from a music academy just down the street from its home at the Musikvereinsaal.
Few brass sections, moreover, are able (or willing) to play as softly as this one. The effect in the first moments of the Bruckner Seventh Symphony was notable; during one of symphonic literature's broadest pieces, listeners found themselves in the midst of chamber music. One of the Bruckner's greatest charms is the "sour" tuning effects of its trombones and tubas. Perhaps no other orchestra is so careful in sorting out these various voices and making their grumbles so fastidious.
Looking at conductors is a dangerous way to listen to music, but it was helpful to watch Mr. Muti lead Mozart: palms opened, arms extended forward like a host at his front door welcoming a guest of great beauty. Mr. Muti made his presence felt mostly in matters of tempo, where a kind of sunny Italian impatience sped the last three movements along. The Poco Adagio movement went off at an amiable trot. The Presto was so fast that even the poise of such a virtuoso orchestra as this was tested. I'm not sure the Vienna players liked it, but they bent their backs and did their best.
If this was Mozart in a hurry, Mr. Muti abandoned himself happily to Bruckner's slow and stately progress. Mozart needed a conductor only occasionally; Bruckner is a another matter, music perhaps less sophisticated than the "Linz" but, with its tempo changes and elaborate bridges from one episode to the next, more complicated.
Mr. Muti seemed to relish each lumbering sequence, and he prepared the glacial climaxes with uncharacteristic forbearance. And when the great Adagio's tempo marking changed to Moderato, Mr. Muti barely moved a step forward. The results were carefully articulated two- and four-note phrases. They gave the music an almost operatic air.
Neither orchestra nor conductor could rescue Bruckner's finale, which sounded as raucous as it usually does. Bruckner had bad luck with last movements, and this one can be as banal as the opening Allegro Moderato is majestic. For three quarters of their length, Bruckner wrote some of the most powerful symphonies ever conceived.
Nature may have rescued the Bruckner Ninth, just as nature, not counting on the diligence of post-mortem scholarship, tried to rescue Mahler's 10th and failed. In the latter, Mahler left us with a searing slow movement that is wonderfully complete and, in itself, succinct. (A third movement was also more or less ready.) The rest, in various states of progress, were "completed" by others. The last movement of Bruckner's Ninth Symphony was never finished by anyone I know of, and I miss it not at all.
The latest thinking of Peter Sellars? Updating mistaken as upgrading? No, this "Barber of Seville," abridged, updated and sung in English, was designed by JoAnn Forman and the Metropolitan Opera Guild for children. Public school classes are attending weekday matinees; the final public performances are this weekend.
While the words "have a nice day" do not quite have the punch of "buona sera," and while Bruce Taylor's usually deft direction left it unclear how the slumming Count managed to fend off Seville's police, and while children (like adults) don't require quite so much spoon-feeding, this was a skillful, rambunctuous romp.
Amy Kaiser's conducting was stylish, and the young cast -- including Christopher Hux as Almaviva, Donald Sherrill as Dr. Bartolo, Joyce Campana as Rosina, Christopher Arneson as Figaro and Ryan Allen as Don Basilio -- sang with verve. Some listeners are sure to come back for more, which was precisely the point. EDWARD ROTHSTEIN
As often with Mr. Pollini, I was torn between admiration and frustration. There were a few flaws in his execution, but they were negligible. The real questions were about his interpretations. How can a pianist of his sensitivity not allow music to breathe when it practically pleads for more expansiveness? How could a musician of his intelligence ignore so much structural drama? By the same token, how could someone who misses so much create such wonderfully elastic singing in parts of the Schumann, or turn an encore performance of Chopin's B-flat-minor Scherzo into a tour de force?
Of course, these contradictions are partly what give Mr. Pollini's concerts their immediacy and appeal (this one ended in a prolonged standing ovation). There is a strong-willed personality underlying these contrasts, making them seem quite intentional. Mr. Pollini is simply not interested in unfolding a musical plot through time; his ambition is to construct a musical object that can stand on its own, free from the messy emotions and mercurial events of the wider world. His performances, often described as modernist because of their lack of sentimentality, also have a Baroque quality: instead of Romantic narratives, they seem to create suites composed of discrete sections with differing rhythms and affects.
Certainly, that was the nature of his performance of "Kreisleriana," which does have the qualities of a suite; Mr. Pollini's Schumann veered between high-speed rattlings of bones and more fleshly introspection. But the same was true, peculiarly enough, of Mr. Pollini's Beethoven. His interpretations generally had a sort of "terraced" quality in which there were discrete levels of sound and character.
This is not how I prefer to hear this repertory, but there is still much to be admired in such constructions. It is impossible, in fact, to leave a performance by Mr. Pollini without something to think about, even if it is sometimes the nature of Mr. Pollini himself.
The theater was founded 96 years ago as an overtly "German-Christian" spoken theater, but it soon began doing operas and operettas, for which its relatively intimate size (1,500 seats) and fine acoustics suit it well. The theater's ties to the all-powerful Vienna State Opera have shifted over the years. Sometimes it has been a direct subsidiary of the bigger company. More often it has been independent, but with a loose working agreement not to duplicate repertory or new productions.
In 1991, Eberhard Wachter, a baritone turned opera administrator, succeeded in amalgamating the two companies. But after his unexpected death in 1992, his successor, Ioan Holender, in his recent negotiations to renew his contract until 2002, made it a condition to spin off the Volksoper once again on its own, as of 1996.
His recommendation for a separate chief for the Volksoper was an interesting one: Klaus Bachler, who since 1992 has run the Vienna Festival and made it a Next-Wavish hotbed of experimental music theater (Steve Reich's "Cave," for instance, started life there last spring). Mr. Bachler, who arrived for an interview at the ultratraditional Cafe Sacher wearing a black shirt, light beige jacket and an AIDS ribbon, is full of enthusiasm about what he calls his "Volksoper adventure."
He and Mr. Holender made it clear that the Volksoper would have its own music director, something Mr. Holender has done without at the State Opera since the departure in 1991 of Claudio Abbado. The two companies will maintain their current sharing of some singers, partly as a way of luring promising young artists to the Volksoper and partly to provide a pool of "covers," or last-minute substitutes, for the State Opera. But otherwise, Mr. Bachler will be on his own.
Right now, to judge from performances over the last three seasons, the performance level at the Volksoper is pretty high. Operettas (Johann Strauss Jr.'s "Gypsy Baron," Kalman's "Grafin Maritza") look a little overlighted and cartoonish but are idiomatically sung and alertly played by the theater's orchestra. The genre is not being renewed systematically, however, and Mr. Holender evinces little interest in it.
The Volksoper does marginal repertory as well. The latest new production has been of Bizet's "Pecheurs de Perles," which improbably is being seen in Vienna for the first time, Mr. Holender said. This was an awkwardly updated production (what profound metaphorical point is made by setting this snippet of Ceylonese local color amid skyscrapers and placing the protagonists at key moments on distracting swaying swings?). But it was decently sung and well played.
Better still was the company's most critically admired production in recent years, of Shostakovich's "Lady Macbeth of Mstensk." Superbly acted in a staging by Christine Mielitz that really punched home every dramatic point, this is just the sort of intensely theatrical opera that works with a smallish company like the Volksoper but too often turns into generalized rhetoric in the wide-open spaces of a major international theater. The score was conducted with real temperament by Donald C. Runnicles, whose presence in the pit was another example of the advantages the company derives by sharing some of its forces with the State Opera.
But as this mixture of operas, operettas and production styles suggests, the Volksoper lacks a ready identity. It is this profile that Mr. Bachler is eager to provide. Exactly what he's going to do and with whom he's going to do it -- conductors, stage directors -- is unclear, perhaps even to him. He speaks kindly of operettas, but in updated production styles of which Mr. Holender, for one, disapproves. He wants to do unusual operas but not to concentrate on exotica. He said that one-third of the Volksoper repertory should be contemporary, but that he wanted to retain the current "nonintellectual" public of working- and middle-class Viennese.
About one thing he was clear. After his success in presenting novelties at the Vienna Festival, he is convinced that Viennese conservatism is "a myth." "Naturally," he added, "Verdi and Gounod have it easier in Vienna, but they do in Paris, too. Volks oper means People's Opera, and what I don't want to do is overwhelm people. Theater is not a school; it should be a seductive experience." Deriding 'Der Ring'
Whatever the past and future success of the Volksoper's service to operetta -- and tourists still pile in by the busload -- the freshest and funniest Viennese operetta revival of the season is not in an opera house at all but in repertory at the Kammerspiele of the Theater an der Josefstadt: "Die Lustigen Nibelungen," ("The Jolly Nibelungs") by Oscar Straus.
This is a "Ring" parody first seen in Vienna in 1904. More precisely, since it draws from the medieval "Nibelungenlied," which was also one of Wagner's sources, it is a "Gotterdammerung" parody. For all its appeal to Viennese and its German-language in-jokes, this is something that New Yorkers might especially enjoy.
The reason is that the operetta was directed by Otto Schenk, the stage director of the Metropolitan Opera's "Ring," with sets and costumes by Rolf Langenfass, who did the Met's "Ring" costumes. The result, whether you regard the Met "Ring" as a solemn tribute to cultural conservatism or kitschy 1950's nostalgia, is a very funny bit of self-parody. The sets look eerily like the Met's, with lots of fur and horns and realistic painted backdrops. Yet the story is pure Offenbachian spoof, sometimes over the top but always sweetly and innocently so.
This is not just Mr. Schenk's parody of himself, or of the Met's demands on him. The staging is also full of operatic in-jokes. Heinz Zednik, for years a famous Mime, finally gets to play, and skewer, Siegfried. But he also looks as if he's been made up to resemble Siegfried Jerusalem, the world's current favorite singer of Siegfried, complete with an impossibly blond and refulgent wig.
To see Mr. Zednik prance onstage, in a scene just like Siegfried's arrival at the Gibichung Hall in the first act of Wagner's opera, firmly fix his monocle, give a little flip with his hand and demurely coo "Hoi-ho" is to realize that comic operetta is by no means dead. If increasingly serious, ambitious secondary opera houses can't or won't revive works like this, then little theater companies with reduced orchestras will have to pick up the torch. Which the Kammerspiele has most decidedly done.
The prominence of such miniatures in Grieg's oeuvre may have undercut some of the grander celebrations, but it has inspired at least two notable recordings of his songs. A Deutsche Grammophon CD by the mezzo-soprano Anne Sofie von Otter (437 521-2) won the 1993 record of the year award from the Gramophone magazine in England, and the baritone Hakan Hagegard has followed with a two-CD album on RCA Victor (09026-61630-2).
It might seem odd that both of these distinguished releases are by Swedish, not Norwegian, singers. Surely, one reason is the sheer excellence of the two artists. But the links between the Scandinavian countries are complex. Norway was a part of Denmark from 1397 to 1814, and then governed by Sweden until 1905, when it finally won independence. Grieg set poetry in German, Danish, high Norwegian (close to Danish) and the more folkish Norwegian favored by nationalists like Henrik Ibsen.
The intimacy of so much of Grieg's music, and that of others, was also related to larger social issues. The late 19th century was the era of the upper bourgeoisie and an aspiring middle bourgeoisie. Since there was not yet an electronics industry to provide musical entertainment at home, music-lovers learned to sing and play piano, and a lively market developed in music for home use by well-known composers.
Then again, Grieg had his own reasons for cherishing musical intimacy. Neurotically, he shied away from the grandiose efforts represented by opera in the age of Meyerbeer and Wagner and by the post-Beethovenian symphony. Intimate music suited his own needs as well as his publisher's.
In addition, Grieg's wife, Nina, having damaged her voice singing opera in her youth, was best suited to the more intimate expression of song. In a letter to his American biographer Henry T. Finck, Grieg wrote: "How does it happen that my songs play such an important part in my production? Quite simply owing to the circumstances that even I, like other mortals, was for once in my life endowed with genius (to quote Goethe). The flash of genius was love. I loved a young girl who had a wonderful voice and an equally wonderful gift of interpretation. That girl became my wife and my lifelong companion to this very day. For me, she has been -- I dare admit it -- the only genuine interpreter of my songs."
Needless to say, he romantically overstated the case, if only in that some of his songs are clearly intended, poetically and musically, to be sung by men. Still, womanly confidences are often preferable to manly proclamations in Grieg's songs, so the lovely Deutsche Grammophon disk, with Ms. von Otter joined by the pianist Bengt Forsberg, takes precedence. Ms. von Otter offers a deft selection of songs, including the important "Haugtussa" cycle, and sings them with a winning blend of tonal warmth and artistic insight.
Even in songs seemingly intended for an impetuous young man, like "A Hope," which appears in both collections, Ms. von Otter's experience in trouser roles (Cherubino, Octavian) helps her create a convincing poetic illusion. And her wonderfully confidential singing, with a technique that allows her to project a full timbre in even the softest phrase, sounds like folk song transformed. Only the greatest lieder singers master the blend of refinement and innocence that recreates in performance terms precisely the folk inspiration and artful naivete embodied in Grieg's music.
Not that Mr. Hagegard's effort, with Warren Jones as pianist, is negligible; far from it. Mr. Hagegard has the rare gift of being able to boom out the dramatic songs, with almost heldentenorish ringing top notes, without violating the song form's restraint. And although six songs overlap in the two collections, Mr. Hagegard's choices nicely balance Ms. von Otter's.
His manly heartiness, seconded by Mr. Jones's stentorian yet dry-toned accompaniments, suggests a public alternative to Ms. von Otter's womanly intimacies, echoed in Mr. Forsberg's warm, flowing pianism. But given the domestic inspiration for so much of Grieg's songwriting, the balance tilts decisively in Ms. von Otter's favor.  RECORDINGS VIEW
Yet Mr. Ge meticulously avoids self-conscious exoticism or pastiche. For the most part, the piece uses Western notions of major and minor tonality to make its emotional appeal.  It is also carried by a powerful narrative sense and by an ear for effect. In the opening pages, the strings are made to howl like the wind. As melancholy blocks of string writing give way to a display of percussion virtuosity and then bright-edged wind scoring, anxiety and festivity fight for attention, only to be yoked together in the brisk fugue that ends the work.
The players and Paul Lustig Dunkel, the conductor, were given a tough workout, and section by section they responded brilliantly. The other works, though overshadowed by Mr. Ge's piece, were also largely pictorial and were equally well served.
Ms. Musgrave's "Rainbow" (1990) is a painterly impression of a violent storm, complete with pounding, torrential rain and a peaceful, shimmering aftermath that evoked the rainbow of the title.
Mr. Rorem, whose "Sun" was juxtaposed with "Rainbow," has long insisted that music cannot really be about anything, or even paint pictures. But storm pieces like Ms. Musgrave's work, or the storms in Beethoven's "Pastoral" Symphony or Rossini's "William Tell," argue against Mr. Rorem's view. Ms. Musgrave's musical language and her choice of effects are very different from Beethoven's or Rossini's, yet in each case the storm imagery is clear enough not to rely on cues from the program notes to make its extramusical suggestion.
That said, there was nothing specifically sunny in Mr. Rorem's music for "Sun" (1967), a song cycle for soprano and orchestra, with texts ranging from a fragment of Ikhnaton's "Hymn to the Sun," to heliocentric poems by Byron, Blake, Shakespeare, Whitman, Robin Morgan and Paul Goodman. Song cycles, of course, play by different rules: the words guide the listener, and the music magnifies them. Mr. Rorem's music almost always does that. His vocal lines have a clarity and directness that makes them seem inevitable, and in "Sun" the changing coloration reflected the differences, subtle and otherwise, between the poets' approaches.
Marla Berg, the soprano soloist, did not have the power to ride over Mr. Rorem's rich orchestration. One could get a general sense of where she was in each of the texts, but she was not able to project the words clearly, and when the music soared, she tended toward shrillness.
Mr. Lazarof's Divertimento III (1992) draws on an almost Bartokian drive and chromaticism, although Mr. Lazarof does not quite command Bartok's inventiveness. Ani Kavafian, the violinist for whom the work was written, played the lyrical solo line with an irresistible tonal beauty.

The Manhattan School of Music's annual Festival of 20th-Century Music closed on Tuesday night with a concert of new works alongside a couple of recent classics. The intimate acoustics of the school's Borden Auditorium well suited the hovering, crystalline timbres of Pierre Boulez's "Eclat-Multiples" (1964), fearsomely complex and seductive despite itself.  An ensemble under the direction of Claire Heldrich gave a sensitive, reasonably precise performance.
Paul Guerguerian's "Bride of the Sister" (1992), sensationally performed by four double bassists and four percussionists, devoted itself even more religiously to the possibilities of pure sound. The great moments in this piece were unexpected matchings of timbres from disparate instruments: extremely high tones on the basses fused with metal percussion resonating to a string bow, or low tones on the basses joined to the deep droning tones of the didgeridoo, an Australian aboriginal wind instrument.
In Nils Vigeland's striking "Ballade" (1981), textures did not matter as much as colliding rhythms and tonalities. Two pianos scampered off on canonically intertwined tangents, frequently stumbling into Ivesian zones of rambunctious, vaguely honky-tonk chaos; a reliance on tritones and diminished chords gave the underlying harmony a seesawing, sometimes dizzying ambivalence. The performance by Lourdes and Luis Perez-Molina was sketchy at times, but the composer's distinctive voice came through.
Also on the program were Jacob Druckman's "Valentine," a swaggering showpiece for avant-garde double bass (dexterously executed by Glen Saunders); David Noon's "Dancing Games," an appealing, rhythmically bumptious song cycle on children's rhymes (Carol To was the strong soprano soloist); and the world premiere of a brightly pulsing "Clarinet Fanfare" by Elias Tanenbaum.  ALEX ROSS
But in a trio of Scarlatti works, and even in the Villa-Lobos, her leaps and hand-crossings were somewhat erratic. And she seemed to lose concentration for a time in the finale of Mozart's Sonata in G (K. 283). Still, the interpretations were well considered, and Ms. Rubinsky's musicality never faltered.
Liszt's Hungarian Rhapsody No. 15, the "Rakoczy March," could have used more weight, and Debussy's "Estampes" more atmosphere. But the sinew, clarity and seeming ease of Ms. Rubinsky's pianism were no small virtues.
A Chopin encore, in combination with the Mendelssohn, made one listener wish Ms. Rubinsky had offered more from the early Romantics. JAMES R. OESTREICH
In other additions to the cast, Franco De Grandis was stiff but stentorian as the King, Leo Nucci contributed an adequate Amonasro, and Michelle De Young made for a haunting offstage priestess. Samuel Cristler, conducting at the Met for the first time, had a good feeling for the overall line but let many details go out of focus; he faced a ragged, unpolished orchestra and subpar chorus. All in all, this was a humdrum night at the Met, needlessly prolonged by an intermission between Acts III and IV. ALEX ROSS
The thought occurred during Peter Serkin's powerful rendering of Max Reger's Piano Concerto, with Seiji Ozawa and the Boston Symphony on Wednesday evening, that perhaps Andy Warhol's concept of a revolving 15 minutes of fame could be applied, with a broader time scale, to the standard repertory. The Tchaikovsky and Schumann concertos, having had their allotted time, would be retired in favor of, say, the Reger and Busoni, which would be warhorses for 50 years before the Carter and Ginastera take over.
It would liven things up in the concert hall, but don't bet the farm that it will happen. New works -- even new old works, like the 84-year-old Reger -- are labor-intensive for both musicians and listeners. The Boston Symphony demonstrated this with a program that set the Reger beside one of the most familiar works in the repertory, the Beethoven Fifth Symphony. Mr. Ozawa took the Fifth at a brisk pace, and neither he nor his players passed up opportunities for purely visceral thrills.
But the Beethoven was coasting; the Reger, a grandly scaled, sometimes sprawling work, was pedaling uphill. Not that the effort went unrewarded. Reger's orchestration has dimension and sweep, and the piano writing is steeped in passion, with tense virtuosity in the outer movements and an endearingly ruminative cast in the central slow movement. Rudolf Serkin championed this concerto and other Reger works throughout his career; now his son Peter is an honest and mostly persuasive advocate.
The sound Mr. Ozawa got from his players matched the intensity that Mr. Serkin brought to the thick-textured piano line, and there was a clear sympathy between conductor and soloist. Mr. Ozawa opened the concert with a trim, dark-hued account of Schubert's "Rosamunde" Overture. ALLAN KOZINN
Mr. Haefliger began with Beethoven's Sonata No. 12 in A flat, the funeral-march sonata. The fluid motion of the opening variation movement was broken by fidgety gestures; the funeral march itself sounded distressingly brisk, metallic, impatient. Schumann's "Kreisleriana" was rushed in the faster movements, distractingly clangorous at the fortissimo. Another problem, aside from the hardness of the sound, was Mr. Haefliger's reluctance or inability to mark out a clear, steady pulse.
He fared better in the second half of the program, more or less all Russian: Scriabin's Sixth Sonata, five Preludes and Etudes-Tableaux by Rachmaninoff, and children's pieces from the set "Musical Toys," by Sofia Gubaidulina (who is also of Tatar descent). The Gubaidulina pieces, composed in 1969, show the influence of Prokofiev heavily; Mr. Haefliger mastered their mercurial moods. The Scriabin was muted but atmospheric, the Rachmaninoff extroverted and splashy. Still, there was a sense of cleverness and expertise in place of genuine musical warmth. ALEX ROSS
In 1844, for example, when the black composer Francis Johnson died, he was hailed as "one of the most celebrated personages of Philadelphia." He founded a school for black musicians, toured the country with his music and appeared in concerts with white musicians. He wrote more than 200 pieces, including dances, ballads and arrangements of opera arias and minstrel songs. He inspired a generation of black composers whose works were well represented in a national catalogue of sheet music in 1870.
Many important black choruses evolved from church singing groups. But most startling are the numbers of black orchestras that were established in major cities. In the 1830's in New Orleans, the Negro Philharmonic Society, with more than 100 members, offered concerts for the "free colored." Two other black orchestras later gave regular concerts in New Orleans. A black symphony was founded in Philadelphia in 1904. At least three black orchestras gave concerts in Chicago during the early decades of this century.
Between 1912 and 1915, both white and black listeners went to Carnegie Hall to hear the Clef Club Symphony Orchestra, which used mandolins and banjos on the second-violin parts. It played music by black composers like Will Marion Cook, Harry T. Burleigh, Samuel Coleridge-Taylor and its conductor, James Reese Europe.
"We colored people have our own music that is part of us," Europe told an interviewer in 1914. "We have developed a kind of symphony music that, no matter what else you think, is different and distinctive, and that lends itself to the playing of the peculiar compositions of our race."
All-black music schools, including the Martin-Smith School of Music and the Music School Settlement for Colored in New York and the University of Music in Chicago, created generations of trained musicians and composers. Black composers' works were given prestigious premieres: William Grant Still's "Afro-American Symphony" (just recorded in a fervent performance by Neeme Jarvi and the Detroit Symphony on Chandos) was played in 1931 by the Rochester Philharmonic; the Chicago Symphony played Florence Price's Symphony in E minor in 1932, and the Philadelphia Orchestra William Levi Dawson's "Negro Folk Symphony" in 1934.
This roster of ensembles, institutions and compositions barely scratches the surface. Much of the music is hard to find, though the Detroit Symphony printed a valuable discography of black concert music in the symposium booklet. At least until World War II, black American concert music tended to be nationalistic according to Dvorak's formula, quoting jazz, the blues, spirituals or black church hymns; in addition, much of the music was programmatic, reaching out to a black community of listeners.
But it is difficult to connect the long history of black concert music with its contemporary social and musical condition. Despite increased opportunity and affirmative action, black concert music seems much more marginal than ever before. The classical heritage is often treated as irrelevant; musical education is a rarity. It may have been easier to find black orchestra musicians during the years of institutionalized racism than it is now.
So the extensive programs devoted to increasing black participation at the Detroit Symphony and in other major urban centers have a challenging task ahead of them. They must help restore as well as establish anew; they must help transform black musical culture as well as the customs of musical institutions. In the meantime, the composers' symposium provided some encouragement, with interest centered on musical creation, not declarations of identity. Conversation was turned inward in reflection, not outward in anger over a difficult past. Just such a spirit nurtured black concert music in far more trying times.  CLASSICAL VIEW
But the Gap Band came to play, and for over an hour it offered up almost unbelievably funky music, all grinding, dirty riffs and chants. The musicians took their better-known songs -- "Early in the Morning," "You Dropped the Bomb on Me," "Party Train" -- and stretched them out with sing-alongs, chants, guitar solos and crowd tricks. The audience members were invited to wave their hands around, or sing along. Mr. Wilson, dressed in white and wearing a sort of captain's hat that looked as if it had been dragged out of deep storage, had the women and the men in the house trying to out yell each other. Whether it had been asked to or not, the audience would have sung along on all the choruses; people were prepared.
The music built upon the rumbling of bass synthesizers and the slapping thud of the bass drums, overlaid by the bass of Robert Wilson, who sent blues ideas flying. The sound recalled a specific time and place, all underscored by the band's outfits, glittering and a decade old. But the music, with all its communal dance power, justified the sense of anachronism.
The Groove Collective, which opened the show, was an anachronism that wasn't particularly justified. The band draws on soul jazz truisms, one-chord vamps decorated with limp improvisations. A few years ago, it played dreadful easy-listening music dreadfully. It performs regularly, and it has improved over the years: now it plays dreadful easy-listening music, but plays it well.
She prefers Cole Porter's 50's musicals, which she says portrayed "fun, sex and money as the most important things in life" to the morally weightier shows of Rodgers and Hammerstein. The 1950's movies "Athena," and "Funny Face" also come in for some playful plot deconstruction.
Ms. Haran's singing is as winning as her commentary. Utterly straightforward and unaffected, she has always suggested a jazzier, more urbane descendant of Doris Day, and in the last two years her increased emphasis on her sultry lower register has enhanced the emotional depth of her singing. At the same time, even the most meditative ballads are infused with a steady current of swing. At Rainbow and Stars, she is accompanied by a trio led by Bill Charlap, whose spare, springy jazz piano buoys her rhythmic drive without adding clutter. Among the high points of her opening-night show on Tuesday were readings of "The Boy Next Door," "How Long Has This Been Going On?," "You're Sensational" and "Moonglow."
The singer also unveiled a gift for affectionate mimicry. When dressed and coiffed like the 50's Deborah Kerr, she offered an incisive impersonation of Marilyn Monroe slithering through Irving Berlin's "Lazy" from the film "There's No Business Like Show Business." It was more than a skillful parody. The overlay of styles spoke volumes about the interface of sex, nostalgia, feminism, movies and popular music over the last 40 years.

After a year off, the Vivaldi's Venice festivals of the Little Orchestra Society entered their fourth season on Wednesday evening with a program called Venetian Vespers: a sequence of Vivaldi sacred works appropriate to the Vespers service. The orchestra, the Metropolitan Singers and the Greek Choral Society, led by Dino Anagnost, gave workmanlike performances of "Domine ad adiuvandum me festina" (RV 593), a "Beatus Vir" (RV 598) and a Magnificat (RV 611), marred at times by uncertain entrances and attacks.
But the stars of the evening shone in solo works: Lorraine Ernest, a soprano, soaring to a lovely conclusion in a "Salve Regina" (RV 617), and Reveka Mavrovitis, a mezzo-soprano, singing touchingly throughout the "Stabat Mater" (RV 621). Christine Schadeberg, a soprano, also contributed strongly in arias and duets.
With commentary by Mr. Anagnost, the format proved effective in presenting attractive, little-known works. JAMES R. OESTREICH
In the past, pop's best put-downs were aimed at an artist's musical shortcomings or personal views. The most often cited example is Lynyrd Skynyrd's 1974 hit "Sweet Home Alabama," a response, in part, to "Southern Man," a Neil Young song that criticizes Southern society. "I hope Neil Young will remember," the band drawls, "Southern man don't need him around anyhow."
Lesser known but equally abusive put-downs range from John Lennon telling Paul McCartney "those freaks was right when they said you was dead" in "How Do You Sleep?," from a 1971 solo album, to the English songwriter Nick Lowe spending the better part of "All Men Are Liars" making fun of the pop singer Rick Astley. "Oh, do you remember Rick Astley?" he asks. "He had a big fat hit, it was ghastly."
There's nothing an audience likes more than a good fight between two stars acting petty. Bickering narrows the gap between listener and performer, lowering the content of their music to a level that anyone can relate to.
Lately, however, rock has changed. The megalomaniacal rock star with a private jet, a swimming pool and a fleet of cars has fallen out of favor. The audience-performer gap, particularly in alternative rock, is quickly closing.
The trend toward star-bashing is best summed up by Beck, a 23-year-old folk-rock singer from Los Angeles, who advises on his new album "Mellow Gold," "Give the finger to the rock-and-roll singer." For Beck and his fans, rock singers are not to be looked up to; they are ordinary human beings with ideas and opinions no more important than those of their listeners.
Now, when rival bands are mentioned, the insults are generally directed to the public perception of the group, not the group itself. In "Range Life," by the alternative rock iconoclasts Pavement, the singer Stephen Malkmus names the Stone Temple Pilots, a young band popular on MTV. On a recent computer conference with his fans, Mr. Malkmus was noncommittal on whether he was disparaging the group. But he does put down the group's fans, accusing them of preferring image to music. "The Stone Temple Pilots, they're elegant bachelors," he sings. "They're foxy to me. Are they foxy to you?"
In "Rock Star," a song Courtney Love's group Hole has performed in concert, Ms. Love mentions by name both Nirvana, the band fronted by her late husband, and Madonna. (The song was rewritten for Hole's new album, "Live Through This.") She doesn't insult them directly but sneers at listeners who want to emulate them. "How'd you like to be Madonna?" she snarls. "You say you'd rather die? Oh, what a lie. Oh, I think you'd like to try." Her song is almost an answer to Beck fans who outwardly agree with his advice to disrespect rock singers but inwardly envy their prestige. As Cobain's suicide suggests, being famous isn't all it's cracked up to be.
On its new album, "Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star," Sonic Youth seeks sanctuary from the Hollywood star system. In the song "Screaming Skull," the group describes a visit to the SST Superstore, a punk rock oasis in the middle of Hollywood's Sunset Strip. It's a hole-in-the-wall shop run by SST, a label with which Sonic Youth had a legal dispute in 1990.
In the song, Sonic Youth tells of thumbing through the store's bins and finding records by bands old and new, popular and unpopular, sitting side by side. Pat Smear, who used to play guitar with the punk band the Germs and recently toured with Nirvana, is working at the cash register. "Pat Smear, Superchunk, society, Sunset Strip," Thurston Moore, Sonic Youth's vocalist and guitarist, sings in a stream-of-consciousness style. "Husker Du, Lemonheads, SST."
When mentioning other bands or mocking rock singers, Sonic Youth, Hole and Pavement seem to be aware that they are becoming what they disparage -- if they're not already there. Chances are Sonic Youth also found some of its own records in the SST Superstore. Alternative rock has defined itself in opposition to the mainstream. What should its protagonists do when they become a part of that mainstream?
Debunking the myth of the rock star is one way to prevent artists' egos from growing and to make sure they continue to relate to their audience as peers, not superiors. The goal of name-calling bands is to avoid the kind of complacency and detachment that the Monkees sang about in the theme song to their 1960's television show: "We're too busy singing to put anybody down." THE NAME GAME
In the past couple of years, a number of pop acts have mentioned fellow musicians in song. While rappers have kept their insults personal, rock singers are getting vague and impersonal. Take a look at the following and decide for yourself which are insults and which are not. *The Fall, a British rock group, asks in "A Past Gone Mad": Why is Peter Gabriel always following us? *Melissa Ferrick, an East Coast folk singer, feels cheated in "The Juliana Hatfield Song": Juliana Hatfield got 37 ads before her record even came out/And I got five ads at stations no one even heard about. * Easy-E, the gangster rapper, questions the masculinity of his former N.W.A. bandmate Dr. Dre in "Real Compton City G's": "All of a sudden Dr. Dre is a g-thing/But on his old album covers, he was a she-thing." *American Music Club, a San Francisco rock group, fantasizes in "Johnny Mathis' Feet": I lay all my songs at Johnny Mathis' feet/I said Johnny, Johnny, can you tell me how to live?  * Nirvana empathizes with the misery of the songwriter Leonard Cohen on "Penny royal Tea": "Give me a Leonard Cohen afterworld/So I can sigh eternally."  POP VIEW
Almost every song Shonen Knife performed sounded as if it lifted music from another song. "Quavers" reproduced portions of Madonna's "Material Girl" note for note, while "Concrete Animals" resembled "Just Like Heaven," by the British alternative rock band the Cure. But these striking similarities were probably accidental. Shonen Knife stripped rock down to such basic chords and structures that its music sounded like the building blocks for songs from any number of rock genres, from psychedelic to hard-core music.
Shonen Knife has been making music for over 10 years, and its grasp of the English language and repertory of guitar chords is improving. On its most recent album, "Rock Animals" (Virgin), the group performs an introspective piano-based song inspired by Brian Wilson ("Another Day") and a stop-and-start heavy metal jam ("Cobra Versus Mongoose"). Still, Shonen Knife's rock remains refreshingly angst-free.
Part of the group's appeal is certainly due to the cultural anomalies that result when a foreign band teaches itself how to play American rock-and-roll with the innocence of a child reading the fairy tales of the Brothers Grimm. On Saturday night, Shonen Knife demonstrated that as its mastery and understanding of American musical and cultural idioms grows, so does the caliber of its songs.
He has stripped down and syncopated his music, moving the bass toward the foreground; there are echoes of Public Image Limited and of Fugazi. Since Mr. Albini settled the typical punk grudges in Big Black, Shellac has turned to more oblique topics -- Negro League baseball, wing-walkers -- and more personal ones. In "Crow," by Mr. Weston, a pummeling bass riff carries lines like "He promises her he will not do all the things he has already done to her." Shellac's songs are barbed and raucous, but with a sense of proportion. Their precision and syncopated spaces make them almost catchy.
Mr. Albini and Mr. Trainer switched roles in Brick Layer Cake, joined by two guitarists. The band pretends to be a vehicle for Mr. Trainer's straightforward, sullen, Leonard Cohen-style dirges. But it is actually a laboratory for guitar drones, with and without the measured thud of Mr. Albini's drumbeats. Guitar notes buzz, peal and hang in the air, recalling mid-1970's albums by Brian Eno and Robert Fripp.
Second on the quadruple bill was Rodan, a band from Louisville whose first CD, "Rusty" (Quarter Stick Records), was engineered by Mr. Weston. Rodan's songs sprawl, sometimes past the 10-minute mark, but without typical solos; they are cinematic, unfolding in riffs that grow loud and soft, speed up, pound away, then suddenly drop or add a beat to shake things up. Jeff Mueller and Jason Noble on guitars or Tara Jane O'Neil, on bass, sing raw, urgent lyrics about sexual passion or private torments. There's plenty of feeling but no melodrama; somewhere between Smashing Pumpkins and Sonic Youth, Rodan creates rock songs that share and exorcise inchoate emotion.
Shorty, which opened the concert, was all sinew. The band knocked out jagged, dissonant riffs while Al Johnson sang unintelligible screeches against the beat. It sounded like a bruising rhythm section in search of songs.
The drama had all the right ingredients from the start: a slightly mysterious flute player, Winfried Michel, who provided the only copy of the manuscript to Mr. Badura-Skoda; an even more mysterious and conveniently sick "little old lady" who owned the document in question and "didn't want to be bothered" by anyone. Numerous attempts by Ms. Badura-Skoda to examine the manuscript for purposes of dating resulted in capriciously canceled meetings.
The whole affair was tantalizing: the first measures of each sonata appear in an authentic contemporary thematic catalogue. Even more devious, Mr. Badura-Skoda was told that some bits were missing and he would have to reconstruct them himself, something he had done before.
To be sure, Mr. Robbins Landon and the Badura-Skodas jumped the gun by assuming that the pieces were authentic before they had had time to examine the manuscript, but this is understandable. Any scholar or scientist who has had hot stuff knows how difficult it is to behave sensibly, and those who have not had the experience probably should not judge. Part of the problem is a kind of intellectual horniness about discovery. It's not that one simply wants fame and fortune but rather that one is gripped by an almost uncontrollable excitement.
THOUGH MUSICOLOGY HAS never been the science it sometimes claims to be, there is nothing like good hard data -- for example, a newly discovered work by a great master -- to turn the cautious scholar into a drooling maniac. Good data relieve us of the onerous burden of having to be clever; ornate interpretations, subtle deconstructions and Byzantine turns of academic prose are unnecessary when you have the Real Thing. Yet a risk is always involved; if you wait until the matter is absolutely verified, it may be old news, and you may have to go back to being merely another clever scholar. On the other hand, moving too quickly can have unhappy results; as Ms. Badura-Skoda kept saying, "It's a little embarrassing."
In some ways this is all reminiscent of the cold fusion debacle that occurred when B. Stanley Pons, Martin Fleischmann and, to a certain extent, the entire state of Utah promised the world a cheap, clean energy source. A little more experimentation and some honest self-examination would have made it obvious that the initially promising results were murky at best. Gary Taubes, in his book "Bad Science," reveals what happens when scientists get caught up in the frenzy of secrecy, competition and anxiety associated with a major discovery. They usually forget the first mandate of scientific investigation, which, in the words of the noted physicist Richard Feynman, is that "you must not fool yourself, and you are the easiest person to fool."
Yet the issues of forgery and undue anticipation by scholars, though not without interest, are only a small part of this story. Most scholars I've spoken to insist that the sonatas are forgeries. When I ask how they know, the answer is always the same: the quality of the sources is suspicious, ergo they're fakes. But what about the quality of the music?
This is the most delightful aspect of the whole debacle. Not a single musician or scholar is willing to say for sure whether, on the basis of the score alone, these pieces are by Haydn. Our musical culture prides itself on considering superstar composers leagues above their "mediocre" contemporaries; yet no one has taken a stand and offered either analytic proof or convincing intuition as to the derivation of these pieces. Nor has anybody raised the potent question: if someone can write pieces that can be mistaken for Haydn, what is so special about Haydn?
What it comes down to is this: unless there is something in the music that couldn't be by Haydn (like five measures of Joplin or Schoenberg), we have no tools, theoretical or otherwise, for proving the case either way.
Here is how it all might go: Critic A decides that the sonatas cannot be by Haydn because Haydn never does things in such a way. Critic B responds that since Haydn is an original thinker, he is capable of doing something unusual at any time; that is the "hallmark of his genius." Critic C finds the pieces unconvincingly dull and figures, therefore, that they could not possibly have been penned by Haydn. Critic D counters: "Well, Haydn can have a bad day, too. Besides, I find the finales fascinating."
To add even more spice, these sonatas were supposedly written during Haydn's experimental Storm and Stress period. Any particularly nutty moments can therefore be dismissed (or praised) by Critic E as "typical of the kind of exaggerated effect associated with the instrumental works of this period in Haydn's oeuvre." Having first-rate "unattributed" forgeries around forces us to acknowledge how much of our prose about music amounts to self-parody.
The whole matter throws our notions of esthetics into a tizzy. The phenomenon in question might be called the baby-picture principle. If we are shown a snapshot of a friend as an infant, it is almost always possible to see resemblance; indeed, the adult in question usually seems to be the inevitable realization of the image. If, however, we are shown an unattributed baby picture and asked, on the basis of the photo, to predict its appearance in 20 years, the task appears impossible.
Knowing that a work is by Haydn or Mozart allows us to see "inevitable" connections. Take away the certainty of authorship, and it's devilishly difficult to read the musical images within.
Under the impression that these piano sonatas were composed by Haydn, Mr. Badura-Skoda fell in love with them. Perhaps his glum demeanor in Santa Barbara, and his refusal to play the last movement of one of the sonatas after playing the first two reflect the sadness of a jilted lover who is told, when the affair ends, "I never loved you; I was faking the whole time."
But Mr. Badura-Skoda's love for these sonatas was real, and from the little I heard of them, the works seemed quite lovable. Still, even if Mr. Badura-Skoda goes ahead with plans to record them, the sonatas, like most such disgraced compositions when shorn of the great composer's name, will probably disappear from sight quickly. Conventional wisdom says that if they are forgeries, they are somehow unworthy of being loved, but conventional wisdom says a lot of silly things.
Perhaps we need to give more weight to understanding the esthetic impulse and less to fetishizing the authenticated objects of that impulse. What we might call "identified great art" may be likelier to elicit our attention, curiosity and love than works outside that category. Yet once evoked, our responses cannot be considered false.
One can be deeply moved by the compositions of one's children or by the very moments in Salieri's operas that Mozart must have detested. One can also love what Noel Coward called "those cheap popular tunes," and one can love fake Haydn sonatas, maybe even more than the real ones.  CLASSICAL VIEW Michael Beckerman teaches music history at the University of California at Santa Barbara.
Unlike mainstream rap, which is based in the hip-hop street culture of largely black neighborhoods, gangster rap, like the baggy fashions inspired by prison uniforms, explicitly celebrates the world of the criminal, complete with its slang. It reflects the rage of the jobless and the addicted, of those who grew up in welfare hotels and on mean streets. As one young man puts it: "Get it right. We ain't standing for this no more. Nobody cares about me. Why should I care about you?"
Yes, one young fan admits, the waving of guns and drugs, not to mention the constant degrading references to women, could very well have a "kind of negative" effect on children and adolescents. But there's another exquisitely ironic aspect: gangster-rap recordings have been extremely successful.
One practitioner notes, "That stuff is selling." Another says, "I'm here to make money." It's the capitalist dream containing what could be the seeds of its own destruction. Snoop Doggy Dogg, whose stardom has been dimmed by run-ins with the law, says critics of the form are "only trying to take away jobs."
Glorifying violence, or telling it like it is? This MTV documentary, searingly assembled by two producers, Ivano Leoncavallo and Abbie Kearse, hits on all the right questions but is wary of answers. Gangster rap is, after all, a problem for MTV, which, as is noted, has rules on gratuitous sex and violence.
But the significance of gangster rap is not artistic. Unlike Tony Bennett with his repertory, for instance, Snoop Doggy Dogg will not be charming audiences 40 years from now with his hostile lyrics. They do, however, have sociological significance at the moment. Bill Stephney, a creator of the group Public Enemy, hears an alarm going off, "an alarm for us to do something." No argument here.
The rest of the show was a fairly pure example of hip-hop working the mainstream. Salt-n-Pepa is virtually the only female rap group to sustain a career, and its latest album, last year's "Very Necessary" (Next Plateau) has spawned a whole host of singles that have kept the group as popular as it has ever been. Whereas rap shows usually sustain themselves for half an hour, Salt-n-Pepa was working with a full concert in mind. Whereas rap concerts are often disjointed, and plagued with shoddy or nonexistent production values, Salt-n-Pepa was almost too professional, with tightly choreographed sexuality and with pop-concert routines, including the tired ploy of flirting on stage with men dragged up from the audience.
The group ran through its older hits, laced with lines like "No means no" and "Let me be me" and singles from the new album, including "Whatta Man," a tribute to a good man, and "Shoop," a tribute to sex. Salt rapped nicely articulate, bouncing lines; Pepa (Sandra Denton) was coarser, a honking tenor saxophone. It was all busy, loaded with activity, and at the end of the concert, the audience finally rose to its feet for "Shoop," the most recent single. The show had been exhausting in its desire to please, to prove the point that women can be independent. Never mind that the group is produced by and has many of its raps written by a man, Herby (Luvbug) Azor.
R. Kelly opened the show, and he's currently the hottest act in black pop, with a huge hit album called "12 Play" (Jive). Mr. Kelly is a sex man (one of the tunes on the album is called "I Like the Crotch on You"), and he pretended to make love to the stage more than once. He also has a good, heavy voice, one that on record owes its share to Aaron Hall, but in concert he improvised, letting gospel melismas ornament his work. Mr. Kelly is a joke, a sex caricature for young teen-agers, but a good one.
The strangest part of his show, and one suggesting that he actually sees his audience as pre-teen, came not when he thanked God, only to grab his crotch a song later, but when he sang a song for his mother. Mr. Kelly was acting like a church singer, not unusual in black pop, invoking the passion of the religious for sex. But this just seemed bizarre, with Mr. Kelly asking the audience, "Is it all right to tell her how much I miss her?" over and over, none of which particularly impressed the audience, even when a picture of his mother floated down from the ceiling. When he finally arrived at his current hit, "Bump 'n' Grind," the young girls in the audience responded, as they did when he dropped his pants and rushed off the stage.
As voices and hand percussion are added and subtracted in the group's continually shifting arrangements, European harmonies shade into African chant, with echoes of American gospel. Marie Daulne, the group's Zairian-born founder, is the daughter of a Zairian mother and a Belgian father. Although she has spent most of her life in Belgium, as a very young child she lived with the pygmies in the Zairian forest. The earthy chants, bird songs and musical animal cries that are recurrent elements in Zap Mama's music suggest a stylized echo of pygmy music.
Except for a soaringly ethereal rendition of a traditional old French chorale, the music at Thursday's program stressed the African elements of the group's heritage. A number of the songs became wittily choreographed vignettes. In one song, the group amusingly parodied the breakdown of a vehicle on a journey that involved several near accidents. In a clever technological improvisation, the women established a strong rhythmic groove by rubbing and tapping their microphones.
But the group's spontaneous playfulness never compromised the rhythmic complexity or the precision of vocalizing that at its best evoked a transcendently happy, multicultural exchange. STEPHEN HOLDEN
Correction:  July 7, 1994, Thursday
A brief music review and a picture caption on June 11 about the singing group Zap Mama described it incorrectly. It is a quintet, not a quartet.
Drive Like Jehu has learned from Sonic Youth, the Feelies, Band of Susans, Public Image Limited and others, but it refuses to turn meditative. It's a band of minimalists orchestrating a chronic grudge. Mr. Froberg rants and obsesses like Sting chained in a suburban basement, while his outbursts are surrounded and ultimately swallowed by the continuous clamor of guitars. The music runs in circles and flails at the same time, its frustration and paranoia gathering force with every reiteration. JON PARELES
"So Much In Love," the first hit from the group's self-titled debut album, is a sleek a cappella remake of the Tymes' 1963 smash that closely follows the original arrangement, right down to its opening finger snaps. The No. 1 single "I Swear" has become an even bigger hit, carrying the album into the top 10. With its chiffon-smooth harmonies and catchy tune, it is a soaringly happy proclamation of teen-age devotion.
Like Boyz II Men, All-4-One aspires to a smooth harmonic blend that obscures individual personalities and softens the rougher edges of the group's deeper voices. Finesse matters more than personality, and the ballad singing suggests the softer Michael Jackson or Al B. Sure multiplied by four.
The album is not all nostalgic sweetness and light. Several cuts bring in hip-hop beats, instrumentation and an edgier point of view. The juxtaposition of old-fashioned and contemporary asserts a continuity between musical eras, and suggests that doo-wop has matured into a classic style. STEPHEN HOLDEN
The Bax was a masterpiece, however, next to Michael Daugherty's "Viola Zombie" for two violas (with Karen Ritscher), a thoroughly tiresome would-be showpiece spinning variations on the "Twilight Zone" theme. The best novelty on the program was, instead, Astor Piazzolla's "Grand Tango," for viola and piano (with the pianist Pablo Zinger), which conceals a world of expression beneath its tango rhythms.
Ms. Salas played with a broad, colorful tone, but she had intermittent intonation problems throughout the evening. The humidity may have been to blame; she had to pause and tune her instrument between each movement of Bach's Suite No. 6 in D.  But her feat of sustaining the line in the Bach was impressive, and she made a reasonably good argument for the other works. ALEX ROSS
Whoever booked Soundgarden into the New York State Armory for two sold-out nights cheated both the band and its fans. The square-block-size, hangarlike room, which has not been a regular spot for concerts, is an instant winner as Manhattan's worst rock performance space, easily surpassing the Palladium. Its stage isn't high enough to take advantage of the clear sight lines; there was no air-conditioning. More important, the acoustics are disastrous: echoes ricochet around the hard surfaces and high ceiling like Ping-Pong balls in an earthquake.
On Thursday night, as I searched for an acoustic sweet spot, what came across to vantage points all around the room (including the front of the sound booth, where the mix was made) were Matt Cameron's robust drumming; Chris Cornell's voice, which was penetrating but barely intelligible, and a murky low rumble that probably originated with Ben Shepherd's bass. Soundgarden's two guitarists, Kim Thayil and Mr. Cornell, could almost have left their instruments home.
The band may have been playing a good set. On its current album, "Superunknown" (A&M Records) which has sold 1.4 million copies, Soundgarden moved beyond its old Led Zeppelin imitations to add melodies and contemplative touches. Among hard-rock bands, Soundgarden is on the arty side. Before the band appeared, there was a short solo performance of virtuosic spoons playing and paranoid poetry recitation by Artis the Spoonman, who also joined Soundgarden for its song "Spoonman." Soundgarden's own set opened with the band accompanying a short film; Pink Floyd need not fear the competition.
Soundgarden has a wide musical vocabulary, from Indian-flavored drones to churning odd-meter riffs to Beatles-tinged ballads; it can play fast, circling patterns, like the ones in "Rusty Cage," or inexorable, earth-moving chords, as in "Mailman." Mr. Cornell sings lyrics with the drama of last-ditch desperation, in a doleful baritone that rises to a wailing falsetto. The songs are bleak but muscular, grappling toward a resolution that never comes.
At the Armory, the band appeared to be shaping slow-rolling crescendos and harrowing peaks. But any dynamics were smothered by the room's acoustics. Beyond the first few rows, where moshing occurred with or without music, fans stood patiently and passively; many left early. Instead of the catharsis promised in the songs, there was a numbing roar, as impersonal as hack arena rock. JON PARELES
Bartok's Concerto for Orchestra, another Solti specialty, also revealed virtuosity in all sections. But Brahms's Haydn Variations suffered from his pushing of tempo extremes; although the players negotiated the fast variations with remarkable cleanliness, Brahms's walloping syncopations missed their punch.
No matter. A great joy was evident in all the music-making, and the orchestra played with a relaxed grandeur that offered even more pleasure than rehearsals had promised. JAMES R. OESTREICH
The center of the film is a show that's billed as a battle of the bands between the 63-year-old Mr. Chavis and the 39-year-old Beau Jocque. Mr. Chavis's zydeco is utterly distinctive, with its own kind of two-step rhythm and modal melodies that hark back to both African and Celtic (Cajun) roots. Mr. Jocque, who acknowledges Mr. Chavis as a source, takes in more modern elements: funk-bass lines, John Lee Hooker's boogie vamps, even a touch of rap. But some observers, like Irene Hebert of House Rocker Records, worry that the music has become "a lot of screaming and hollering," and that no one records slow songs anymore.
While both contenders start out saying that the battle is just a promotional  gimmick, the competitive spirit emerges. "I know more music than he's ever going to learn," Mr. Chavis says. "I done forgot more."
Mr. Jocque says, "I wish him well, but he don't have a chance!"
And they play hard, as Mr. Jocque stretches out his regional hit, "Give Him Cornbread," with solos all around the band, and Mr. Chavis churns out his unstoppable groove. Mr. Mugge catches the details of band members' efforts and dancers' leg-swinging footwork.
The film also reveals the resentment around Mr. Chavis's coronation from other musicians and zydeco entrepreneurs. "Let the public decide," says Sherman  Richard, the owner of Richard's Club in Lawtell and a Beau Jocque partisan. There's also commentary and informal, accordion-and-rubboard performances by Nathan Williams (of Nathan and the Zydeco Cha-Chas) and by John Delafose (who leads the Eunice Playboys).
Music documentaries often present local styles as idyllic and unspoiled; Mr.  Mugge lets viewers see the tension in the local scene. In the meantime, those accordions keep everybody dancing.
THE KINGDOM OF ZYDECO
Directed by Robert Mugge. At Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street. Running time: 71 minutes. This film has no rating.
FILM REVIEW
The pianist and composer Fred Hersch, an H.I.V.-positive gay man, is fighting to bring jazz and the politics of AIDS together. He gathered 21 jazz artists, several of them homosexual, to record this gorgeously moody set of late-night ballads, a benefit album for Classical Action: Performing Arts Against AIDS.
The collection balances prominent names like George Shearing, Gary Burton and Mr. Hersch with others of growing renown. The singer and pianist Andy Bey gives "Nobody Else but Me" a slow, smoldering intensity that establishes him as the male counterpart of Shirley Horn. TanaReid, a quintet led by the drummer Akira Tana and the bassist Rufus Reid, offers an ethereal, classically shaped "Memories of You."
"Little Prayer," written and played by the gifted Houston pianist David Catney (who himself has AIDS) and sung by Sandra Dudley, sums up the album's sad but hopeful spirit: "I lie awake and count the stars/ I feel that you're still there."
The album is not sold in stores; it can be purchased by calling 800-321-AIDS. JAMES GAVIN

Which didn't in any way detract from the audience's pleasure. When Maxi Priest, a soul-styled crooner who has had international pop hits, came out, the audience stayed on its feet for his whole show. He sang his hits -- "Close to You," "Temptress" and Cat Stevens's "Wild World" -- and Marley's "Get Up, Stand Up" with an intensity that's not found on his records. Mr. Priest wasn't hard but he was fluid, and he sang a series of uptempo songs that let him spread his cool and long melody notes across the undulating rhythms. He had the audience wild.
Marcia Griffiths, a former backup singer for Marley, performed before Mr. Priest and did a set that included a handful of Marley's tunes, including "Buffalo Soldier" and "No Woman, No Cry." She was joined by Judy Mowatt, another of Marley's backup singers, and the two rocked the hall and had people standing. Ms. Griffiths, like many of the older reggae singers, can sound American, and on several tunes (including an older hit, "Electric Boogie"), the band mimicked an American rhythm-and-blues sound, but with reggae rhythms, while Ms. Griffiths sang in an almost American accent.
She had been anticipated by Beres Hammond, a small and dapper singer who was amiable, a lover in white. He sang in a Southern soul voice, often letting his singing glide over just a thick bass line and the slight hiss of percussion. He was passionate, nearly on his knees, moaning his love or lack of love or wishes for love. He sang his hits, including "She Loves Me Not" and "Putting Up a Resistance," and appealed to the audience to not be misogynist, saying, "God's most perfect gift to man was certainly a woman." An odd compliment at best, but post-Marley reggae has been the home of the platitude.
The show closed with Steel Pulse, a complete band; the rest of the performers had all been backed by one group, the A-Team. Steel Pulse appeals in part to American college students, and the band closed the night with a dull set that mixed reggae and rock and religious and social platitudes and love. The band, which was finishing up a show that had lasted at least four hours, had people streaming out the doors, and it was a good example of why the dance-hall style has become reggae's ambassador. Dance hall leaves preaching for Sunday morning; it's good-time music, occasionally socially crude but set to ferocious music and lacking any doubt at all about where it's from and whom it's talking to. Just the thing for Saturday night.  POP REVIEW
On Wednesday night, the violinist Ik-Hwan Bae, Bargemusic's artistic director for the last 10 years, put together an exceptionally involving program that upstaged the beauty of the setting. He was joined by the violinist Nai-Yuan Hu, the cellist Wilhelmina Smith and the pianist Ursula Oppens. The high point was an utterly splendid performance of Faure's Second Piano Quartet. The string players (with Mr. Bae switching to viola) established a rhapsodic, intimately powerful sound, and Ms. Oppens's clean, hard tone added a 20th-century dimension, particularly in the quirky second movement. The Adagio cast a spell that lingered long after the performance ended.
Before intermission, Mr. Bae and Mr. Hu brilliantly sped through Spohr's Duo in D (op. 67 no. 2), a genial slice of high Romanticism with lovely Schubertian themes strewn about indiscriminately. A sharply focused reading of Haydn's Trio in C, Hob. XV: 21, opened the program. The music-making on display here showed not a trace of showmanship; its ingratiatingly casual air gave way to visceral interpretive passion. ALEX ROSS
Both festivals appeal to connoisseurs because they offer the kinds of Classical music connoisseurs pride themselves on liking best: song recitals, solo instrumental recitals and chamber music. Feldkirch concentrates on song; indeed, it counts as the premiere lieder festival in the world today, with an unparalleled lineup of singers and accompanists. This year saw recitals by, among others, Andreas Schmidt, Anne Sofie von Otter, Olaf Bar, Peter Schreier, Robert Holl, Edith Mathis and Brigitte Fassbaender, along with the local debut of Cecilia Bartoli and another of the regular Feldkirch readings by the recently retired Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau. Not counting the Alban Berg Quartet and such piano recitalists as Andras Schiff, Alfred Brendel and Anatol Ugorski.
At Lockenhaus, Mr. Holl was also on hand, along with Edith Wiens, Heinz Zednik and several modern-music vocal specialists. But the real action here is the instrumentalists, most in their 20's and 30's and, if not quite famous on the international circuit, then destined to become so. They included the violinist Christian Tetzlaff; the violist and cellist of the Hagen Quartet, Veronika and Clemens Hagen; the clarinetist Sabine Meyer; the pianists Michel Beroff, Paul Gulda, Aleksei Lyubimov, Thomas Larcher and Oleg Maisenberg; the trumpeter Markus Stockhausen; the Camerata Academica from Salzburg, and the Arnold Schoenberg Chorus from Vienna. Plus the violinist Gidon Kremer, who started the festival and remains its dominant artistic figure.
If both of these festivals appeal to similar, largely German and Austrian audiences and appear securely established, both went through identity-wrenching crises just a few years ago. Lockenhaus emerged slightly redefined and stronger than ever. Feldkirch seems to be still finding its way, for all the charm of its setting and the cultivated glamour of its stars. Schubertiade Feldkirch
The Feldkirch crisis came in 1991 when this festival, which started life in 1976 up the road in the even tinier town of Hohenems, moved its operation south to Feldkirch and then changed its name to reflect the move. The reasons had partly to do with outgrowing the minuscule facilities in Hohenems and partly with a squabble with the local authorities. The result is a picture-perfect setting in the Feldkirch Conservatory, a lovely site right across the rushing Ill River from the center of town, with regular access to the modern, anonymous-looking local civic hall for bigger concerts.
But regulars in both the audience and among the artists miss the intimate charm of Hohenems and complain about the Feldkirch acoustics. "Hohenems was smaller, simpler and had a much better acoustic," said the baritone Andreas Schmidt, who was singing in his seventh Schubertiade since 1987. "It's too dry here. One can see and hear, but it's not a hall singers like to sing in. The tone goes out from the stage and just disappears."
For Gerd Nachbauer, who founded the festival with the baritone Hermann Prey and who has run it single-handedly since 1977, acoustics are a matter of taste and the move was an economic necessity. Feldkirch receives no public or private subsidy and must rely on its box-office sales. Too-small halls means too-small revenues.
Mr. Nachbauer seems oddly constrained in his articulation of the festival's mission and oddly unwilling to capitalize on its claim to fame as a lieder center. Mr. Prey had sought in vain to perform the complete works of Schubert in Hohenems, a goal he also tried and failed to realize at the 92d Street Y in New York. Schubert was the sole composer until 1983, and remains a focus, as do song recitals, which Mr. Nachbauer rather grudgingly concedes occupy "a certain bloc for themselves."
Otherwise, there are all manner of mostly 19th-century pieces, chamber ensembles and even orchestras, when they can be afforded: Nikolaus Harnoncourt led the Royal Concertgebouw of Amsterdam in all the Schubert symphonies in 1992. But Mr. Nachbauer seems to be blurring his focus further this year by starting song and chamber programs from April to September in surrounding castles, churches and villages and mentioning them in the Feldkirch brochure.
The saving grace, as it should be, is the quality of the music and the artists who perform it. Despite Mr. Schmidt's complaints, the sound in the Feldkirch Conservatory seems at least adequate. And within a single day to have two recitals of the distinction offered by Miss von Otter, with the fortepianist Melvyn Tan as her hyper-alert accompanist, and Mr. Schmidt, with the stalwart Rudolf Jansen, is worth a journey all by itself.
Mr. Schmidt's all-Schubert recital was, quite literally, the kind he could present only here. (He said it was rejected as too esoteric by the Wigmore Hall in London, which is a pretty sophisticated place itself.) The program consisted mostly of very rare songs, including two long narrative ballads from 1811-15. "The public here knows their Schubert and comes back again and again," he said, adding that this single program had taken more work than anything he had ever done. "It's difficult. You have to find unusual works every time, or everyone would sing along." Lockenhaus Festival
The crisis at Lockenhaus came after the 10th festival in 1990. Conceived as an intimate gathering of Gidon Kremer's musical friends, many from the Soviet bloc, the festival had grown into a dazzling collage of all stars, documented by Philips Records in a bulky commemorative album.
But this had always been a home-grown affair, put together with minimal money (despite some small public and private sponsorship) by Mr. Kremer and the local Roman Catholic priest, the Rev. Josef Herowitsch. Concerts take place in Father Herowitsch's gorgeous Baroque church and the old Esterhazy hunting castle that overlooks the town, and artists still receive expenses only, no fees.
By 1990, however, Lockenhaus had grown to dangerously grandiose proportions, or so its organizers feared. "We had 30 concerts in two weekends with more than 60 artists, and it exhausted us," Father Herowitsch said. The result was a decision to skip 1991 and to rethink the festival.
"I needed a break, a sabbatical," Mr. Kremer said. "I wanted to feel I was here not out of duty but out of free will. I decided to take all the cards off the table: to keep the table but to play a new game on it.
"In the first 10 years, the concept was to select the artists and let them play what they wanted, exploring the breadth of music," he continued. "We did more than 1,500 pieces, all the classics and a lot of personal favorites. But I decided that if I was to continue playing on this table, I wanted to explore the depth of music, not the breadth."
The retooled festival, which began again in 1992, is called the Kremerata Musica, still under the Lockenhaus aegis. Each festival concentrates on a composer or two: first Schubert and Shostakovich, then Schumann and Alfred Schnittke last year, and now "Arnold Schoenberg and His Time." Next year, Mr. Kremer promises an escape from the S ghetto and hints that the focus may be a living composer.
But he won't reveal more than that, for despite the greater advance planning the new concept permits, a spirit of improvisation remains central to this festival's very being. Certainly the quality of music and music-making regularly served here is distinguished. Highlights of the last two days included a pointed, delicately shaded performance of Schoenberg's "Pierrot Lunaire"; a mesmerizing Bartok Sonata for solo violin from Mr. Tetzlaff; Cage and Ives from Mr. Lyubimov, and a rollicking, exact account of Stravinsky's "Histoire du Soldat." Despite the modernity and diversity of this repertory, Mr. Kremer's loyal audiences seem eager to accept whatever he offers them.
"I have to guard a certain secrecy in order to maintain the excitement," he explained. "I'm aware of what's going to be played in two days, but I'm not announcing it, not only so we can make changes, but so people can concentrate on what is being played today. It serves the cause if somehow people are prepared to take anything. They deserve to participate in the adventure."  CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
Though the music making was of a high order throughout, the first movement of Opus 59, No. 1, lacked sweetness and breadth. The group dug into the crescendos a little too eagerly, without savoring the peripatetic lyricism that puts this work midway between Mozart and Schubert. The Emerson's concentration on developmental logic muted several moments of irrational pleasure, as when the first violin floats into an ethereal high register several times in the first movement.
In Opus 59, No. 2, Philip Setzer took over the first violin seat from Eugene Drucker and produced arrestingly rhapsodic solos in the Adagio; the sheer force of collective expression in the fortissimo chorale toward the end of the movement was astonishing. But the structure of the first movement did not seem fully digested, and the Scherzo had too little wit and charm.
The Emerson is recording the complete Beethoven quartets for Deutsche Grammophon, and I would guess that the early and late works will prove most successful; the lyric expanses of the middle quartets are not quite so suited to its temperament. But no quartet has ever definitively encompassed the whole cycle, and the Emerson is better prepared than nearly all modern competitors for the challenge. ALEX ROSS  IN PERFORMANCE
Mr. Moore isn't some rural discovery. He was born in Los Angeles and has been knocking around the music business since the 1970's, recording pop and funk. But during the 1990's, he played bluesman roles in Los Angeles theater productions, and now he has made an album, "Keb' Mo' " (Okeh/Epic), with a back-porch-blues flavor.
On Thursday night, he played his own songs alongside Robert Johnson's "Kindhearted Woman," plunking out genial syncopations on acoustic or steel guitar. Most of his songs, like "She Just Wants to Dance," aren't as desolate as those of his inspirations, though there are glimmers of paranoia in "Love Blues": "If it was left up to me, babe, you would never get to go nowhere." Mr. Moore may not have been born into the blues, but he captures a lot of their spirit. If he stays with the style, he could become a latter-day version of Taj Mahal. JON PARELES  POP: NEW MUSIC SEMINAR
The shows of Knapsack and Throneberry at the Knitting Factory and Sammy at the Mercury Lounge overlapped, so I saw most but not all of the performances. I was, however, able to see all of Scarce and Echobelly's performances, also at the Mercury Lounge. Unannounced schedule changes meant missing other young bands with one-word names (Envelope, Furthur, Dish) elsewhere.
Knapsack and Sammy are among the first emerging bands to sound like two recent college radio favorites, Superchunk and Pavement, respectively. At the Sammy show, audience members even shouted requests for Pavement songs as the band played winding guitar lines and sang elliptical poems. Knapsack's boisterous uptempo screamers were equally derivative. But both bands were also tight and competent and not far from finding their own voices. After all, a band has to start somewhere, and there are far worse records to look to than those of Pavement and Superchunk.
Throneberry is one step further along in its evolution. In concert, it imbued its college-radio influences with a touch of classic rock, creating an identity through well-organized chaos. Vocals touched with emotion, drumbeats pushing against the fetters of rhythm, and guitars squealing as unobtrusively as possible resulted in songs that threatened to spill over the sides of the bucket of pop music.
Instead of condensing pop melodies and noise-rock into a single sound, the Providence, R.I., trio Scarce alternated between the two, coloring in the gaps with new wave and art-rock. On "Sideways All," Chick Graning throttled his guitar, Joyce Raskin energetically attacked her bass, and Jud Ehrbar thrashed at his drum set. Just when the raucous jam session reached a climax, the three started singing the melodic chorus of "Sideways all" in perfect unison, transforming strident noise into an ecstatic pop hook.
The English band Echobelly closed the night with songs built on the self-obsession and romantic crooning of Morrissey, a pop star also from England. The music was a tight wall of sound with rough edges provided by Debbie Smith, who used to play guitar in Curve and had eight guitar-effects pedals at her disposal. Hovering over the sonic wall was Sonya Madan, whose beautiful voice was an ideal foil for her harsh, incisive lyrics. NEIL STRAUSS  POP: NEW MUSIC SEMINAR
Sacrati had quite a reputation in his time; alas, only his earliest opera, "La Finta Pazza," survives.
However many masters may have been involved, "L'Incoronazione," of 1643, is a unified masterpiece, and Mr. Miller has the good sense to let it speak for itself. The unit set, designed by John Conklin, conveys both monumentality and intimacy, and its canny mix of symmetry and asymmetry engages the eye throughout.
With superb work from all hands -- Judy Levin in costuming, Robert Wierzel in lighting and Elsen Associates in makeup -- Mr. Miller frames the work in intersecting planes of gods and mortals. Having set the scene, the gods, as white as statuary in their classical robes, check in at times on the mortals, richly outfitted in 17th-century garb.
Mr. Miller provides subtle, eloquent touches, as when Poppea, wrapping Nero around her proverbial finger, wraps his shirt string around an actual finger. Nero and Poppea touch hands in the final duet, parting them gingerly on an excruciatingly poignant dissonance.
The cast leaves little to be desired. If Dana Hanchard is slightly upstaged as Poppea, it is only because two of the best and strongest countertenors around rivet attention: David Daniels, brazen and stentorian as Nero, and Brian Asawa, plush and velvety as Ottone.
Ms. Hanchard combined strength with vulnerability in appropriate measure on Saturday. (The fact that she was seven months pregnant was painful to contemplate, with knowledge that the historical Nero eventually kicked the pregnant Poppea to death.) Phyllis Pancella was hardly less impressive as Ottavia, with full, flowing tone and lovely legato.
Wilbur Pauley's usual stolidity served him well as Seneca. Belinda Thayer Oswald sang Drusilla attractively. Cesar Ulloa gave an enjoyable burlesque turn as Poppea's maid. The dieties were winningly portrayed by singers from Glimmerglass's Young American Artist program: Marguerite Krull, dashing as Fortuna; Julianne Borg, sensitive as Virtu'; Susan Mello, spunky as Amore.
For the first time in its 20-year history, Glimmerglass is using a band of old instruments: nine players plus the conductor, Jane Glover, who chimes in on second harpsichord. Weighting and balances were ideal for the 900-seat house, and Ms. Glover's pacing was excellent.
"L'Incoronazione" was undertaken as a co-production with the Washington Opera, which, with a recent change in leadership, has decided not to stage it. Washington's loss.
Mr. Warner's "Barbiere," drawing on Escher and Magritte, the Keystone Kops and the Three Stooges, commedia dell'arte and vaudeville, is the sort of thing that gives post-modernism a bad name. Rossini's refined wit and genius never stand a chance against the sight gags, pratfalls and -- yes, folks -- mock urination.
Mr. Warner may be trying to make the audience share the characters' agony at the end of the first act. ("And my poor mind, stunned and reeling, shrivels up and goes insane," the supertitle reads.) If so, he succeeded with one viewer.
The pity is that some fine young singers are on hand: Mark Oswald as Figaro, Paul Austin Kelly as Almaviva and Theodora Hanslowe as Rosina. Mr. Oswald, more than anyone else, gave fine definition to the coloratura this afternoon, but the crudity of the staging seemed to rub off on all the singers at times. Mr. Pauley's Basilio was as far removed from his usual persona and his Seneca of the previous evening as imaginable, but he trouped along gamely.
Stewart Robertson, the company's music director, conducted the good little orchestra well. That the singers sometimes lagged behind the tempos seemed understandable what with the weight of stage business in tow.
Filling out the weekend, on Friday evening, was Dorothy Danner's production of Gilbert and Sullivan's "Iolanthe," or "The Peer and the Peri." (As in "Barbiere," an elderly ward lusts after his nubile charge. A theme?) The staging is heavy-footed, literally and figuratively. (The fairies, it sounds, must be wearing combat boots.) Too often, Ms. Danner's satire, seemingly aimed as much at composer and librettist as at their own targets, loses focus and bite, and sheer silliness reigns.
Still, with Mr. Warner's "Barbiere" fresh (?) in mind, a carper is inclined to desist. And here, too, the cast supplies major assets: Angelina Reaux, wearing an uncomely sausage wig, as Phyllis; Diane Lane as Iolanthe; James Busterud, as Strephon, and Philip Cokorinos, who made a better, firmer impression on Friday as Private Willis than he did in the larger role of Bartolo in "Barbiere."
"L'Incoronazione" is to have two more performances, on Saturday and on Aug. 12. The Glimmerglass season ends on Aug. 22, with "Il Barbiere."  OPERA REVIEW
Mr. Fischer's stance as lonely defender of local tradition against international encroachment may be a little smug, however, and it certainly comes late. In the Haydn Symphony No. 97, I noted with pleasure the after-the-beat accents in the introduction, some shaved note values in the vivace that followed and the lazy upbeats of the Menuetto. Yet do we really have to go to their Austro-Hungarian source to hear these things? Central European Classical style, it seems to me, was thoroughly pillaged long ago and the spoils spread from Osaka to Helsinki. There and elsewhere, they are put to daily use.
The Austro-Hungarian Haydn Orchestra, on the other hand, does these things as well as most if not better. The strings have a grainy, rough-cut quality. The horns in Haydn's Overture to "La fedelta premiata" displayed an echt Central European fallibility. In the first tutti of the Beethoven B-flat Piano Concerto, No. 2, the violins slipped out of tune in that charming fashion native to the Danube.
One heard true difference in the Schubert A-major Rondo for violin and strings. This kind of relaxed, unhurried, inward-looking hedonism -- utterly devoid of urgency or aggression -- scarcely exists in international orchestras today. Rainer Honeck, the violin soloist, is not a devastating virtuoso, but he got through the hard parts and was as warm and attentive as his accompanying players. The orchestra uses modern instruments, and one hears little that is finicky in matters of period practice. These musicians speak their own rich dialect, one the world has come to understand quite well.
The rest of the evening was Martha Argerich, a pianist whose Beethoven playing was not Classical, Romantic, Austro-Hungarian or Argentine but simply itself. Miss Argerich reaffirms the idea that technique is not about producing notes but making connections. An idea that goes with it is this: Musicians can create only sounds they can imagine. Miss Argerich, at any rate, imagines vividly, and the progression from spirit to body to instrument is so natural, so unencumbered that each sound tingles with drama.
This is certainly the most straightforward of Beethoven's concertos. There are fewer interpretive puzzles to agonize over, little ambiguity of message. Master the notes, have a good time and it will always sound inviting. Miss Argerich invests it with something special, with a kind of electricity more normally found in popular music. It is the sensual appeal of an Aretha Franklin shout or the tone of Frank Sinatra in the 1950's. New Yorkers love Martha Argerich, and this shouting audience would not let her leave the stage.  MUSIC REVIEW
In between, the pianist Marcus Roberts performed a solo version of Scott Joplin's "Maple Leaf Rag" that was extraordinary in its lapidary detail. Shining dissonances glittering like pool water on a sunny day sat next to stiff metallic bangs in the bass register; some passages were soft and damp while others were harsh. Mr. Roberts abruptly let blues ideas jut out, and only sometimes stuck to the piece's turn-of-the-century modernism.
The second half opened with Wynton Marsalis's big band playing a section from his epic work "Blood on the Fields" that worked over a driving beat made famous by the drummer Sam Woodyard. The piece sets up short, competitive solos, and the tenor saxophonists James Carter and Victor Goines matched blues moans while the trumpeters Marcus Printup and Russell Gunn tried to outdo each other with completely different conceptions. It's a piece that features Mr. Marsalis, and he played with reserve, smearing notes with his plunger, rarely playing lines, instead adding colors as the band riffed behind him.
The tenor saxophonist Joe Henderson came out to do "Take the 'A' Train," accompanied at first only by his drummer, Al Foster. Mr. Henderson is an eruptive soloist in a quiet way and he quickly left the tune behind. The bassist George Mraz joined in and Mr. Henderson became effusive with ideas, gnarled figures that he repeated or left to dissipate under the weight of silence.
"Gee Baby, Ain't I Good to You," was a perfect example of the constraints imposed by television. Mr. Marsalis, Doc Cheatham and Sweets Edison, three exceptional trumpeters, all lined up and turned in perfect fragments of solos; the musicians seemed unsure of who followed whom, making the performance a bit tentative. Their second tune would have been spectacular, but it never came. By the time the Lincoln Center Orchestra closed the concert with another of its set pieces, the "Second Line" section of Duke Ellington's "New Orleans Suite," the audience had heard enough, giving the band and the concert their deserved standing ovation.  JAZZ REVIEW

For some songs, dancers appeared. The women were flirtatious; the men were preening or daredevil, one jumping and whirling over a bottle without knocking it down, another twirling a pair of knives near loins and throat. A third dance proved that rappers didn't originate crotch-grabbing.
Village Drums of Freedom brings Trinidadian steel-drum calypsos into a coalition with salsa, jazz and other outside influences; its set began with a drummer offering a Rastafarian salutation. The band was uneven: strongest in the calypsos, where its untidy rhythm section sounded jaunty, and weakest during its one song with vocals, an earnest invocation of African and Caribbean unity. Its two steel drummers, however, were fluent and audacious jazz improvisers.  POP REVIEW
The evening also brought out the sophisticated balance that the early New Orleans groups had between the soloist, group polyphony and group arrangement. On song after song, the band moved from episodes in which a single soloist improvised, backed by the rhythm section, to tousled group improvisations in which no single instrument ruled. The players, led by the clarinetist Michael White, included Mr. Marsalis, Wendell Brunious and Willie Singleton on trumpets, Fred Lonzo on trombone, Wycliffe Gordon on tuba, Don Vappie on banjo and guitar, Reginald Veal on bass and Herlin Riley on drums. Written sections kept order, as did riffs and breaks. Call-and-response sections made way for instrumental conversations, and there was sense of democratic freedom that's rarely heard in music anymore.
The evening was meant to highlight the pre-Armstrong legacy of trumpet-playing, and the band performed pieces by King Oliver, tunes associated with Buddy Bolden and Freddie Keppard. "Home Sweet Home," a piece played by Buddy Bolden matched the lope of Mr. Riley's wood block against Mr. Singleton's arching improvisations. Mr. Lonzo, with his long glissandos, starting in the basement and going to the attic, added wit to the music, and the beat was everywhere, a driving shuffle barely hemmed in by the endlessly inventive themes and variations proposed by the forms of the songs.  JAZZ REVIEW
If this concert is an indication of their intentions, they are not thinking strictly of the piano trio literature, but of the combinations their instrumentation suggests. Mr. McDuffie and Mr. Kirshbaum opened the concert with Ravel's Sonata for Violin and Cello, and then Mr. Kirshbaum and Mr. Dichter played the Rachmaninoff Sonata in G minor (Op. 19). It was only after intermission that the musicians played the one work for their full lineup, the Brahms Trio in B (Op. 8).
It was clear that these players are still feeling their way toward a unified approach, but they seem to bring to the music similar ideas about style. In fact, seductive as the ultra-polished sound of a full-time trio (the Beaux-Arts, for example) can be, there are times when the testing of a new relationship yields brighter sparks.
Those were what made the Brahms the most satisfying of the performances. Each of the work's four movements began with a carefully regulated give-and-take, as if the musicians were tiptoeing around one another. Brahms took that tendency into account and humanely shaped his movements as emotional arches, so that pressures, passions and complexities build gradually. Still, each has a moment when abandon is necessary, and a performance will stand or fall on how the players interact in this kind of musical free fall.
These three kept those moments sounding volatile, neither fully settled nor precarious. They were assertive and fiery; yet there were times within the trio texture when one player seemed to favor subtlety while the others wanted to push the music's edge. In a sense they had it both ways, since before those imbalances were settled, Brahms had led them to the next skirmish. And inevitably, they found common ground again in each movement's final pages.
Mr. Kirshbaum and Mr. McDuffie were in complete agreement on the Ravel, a hard-edged, melancholy work that precluded tonal opulence. They met the piece on those terms, producing a finely intertwined, slightly astringent sound. In the Rachmaninoff, Mr. Kirshbaum and Mr. Dichter played beautifully but did not always agree on the music's impulses. In the Brahms, disagreements proved exciting, but here they were a distraction.
The concert also yielded one felicitous intersection of music and nature. At the start of the third movement of the Brahms, when the trio produces a series of gently spun lines that end in pauses, an owl filled the spaces with a series of steadily paced hoots perfectly suited to the music's pulse. Brahms might have found it amusing; John Cage would have loved it.  MUSIC REVIEW
Weezer, which shared the bill, is a Los Angeles band that retraces pop-rock from the 1960's to the 80's. It alludes to bands from the Beatles to the McCoys ("Hang on Sloopy" reverberates in Weezer's hit "Undone: The Sweater Song") to the Bee Gees to Dinosaur Jr. Rivers Cuomo, Weezer's 23-year-old guitarist, singer and songwriter, sees nerdy adolescence from the inside. His character pretends to be a rock star in a garage plastered with Kiss posters, wants a girlfriend who never even leaves the house without him, or feels good because "I look just like Buddy Holly/ and you're Mary Tyler Moore." Songs jumped suddenly from folky fingerpicking to fuzz-toned power chords, giving the audience reason to mosh along with good tunes.  POP REVIEW
Horde, a neat acronym for the clunky phrase Horizons of Rock Developing Everywhere, was conceived of in 1992 by Blues Traveler, a New York-based band that continues to select most of the groups on the tour. Blues Traveler has performed in the festival every year. This time around, it was joined by the Dave Matthews Band, Cycomotogoat, Big Head Todd and the Monsters, the Screaming Cheetah Wheelies, Rusted Root and the Allman Brothers Band. Though most of these groups are glorified bar bands, playing an all-American fusion of blues and rock, an overwhelming majority of audience members seemed to be below drinking age.
The pacing was uncanny: literally seconds after a performance on one stage ended, a group on the other stage began. The day started on the main stage with the Dave Matthews Band, the most promising new group on the bill. It performed lively, introspective rock songs that had just the right amount of open spaces for improvisations and solos. Outside of Mr. Matthews's gently emotional vocals, the high point was the violin playing of Boyd Tinsley, which moved nimbly from mock-classical background accompaniment to upbeat bluegrass.
On the second stage, Cycomotogoat gave the festival a new flavor of jam, playing garage rock that leaned heavily on late 1960's psychedelia. It was followed by a main-stage set by Big Head Todd and the Monsters, a trio that looked like a grunge band but played blues-tinged country-rock. Though the group chugged through proficient rock songs with plenty of body, Todd Park Mohr's guitar playing was not strong enough to sustain the band through the entire set.
Back on the second stage, the Screaming Cheetah Wheelies came next, with good-time psychedelic blues-rock touched with saccharine Memphis soul. By the time they began their last song, however, most of the audience had filtered back into the amphitheater to make sure it didn't miss one overblown note of Blues Traveler.
On record, Blues Traveler is finally learning how to write proficient songs. But live, it sticks to its forte: jamming. Every now and then, the front man, John Popper, remembers to stop and sing. The band's appeal rests on the contrasts between the guitarist Chan Kinchla and Mr. Popper, who also plays harmonica. Tonight, Mr. Kinchla's strength was in his rhythmic guitar riffing, and his quest to create the perfect hippie brand of metal. Mr. Popper provided the band's idiosyncracies, playing lightning-fast solos on harmonica and mixing Monty Python-style humor with a Dungeons and Dragons sense of mysticism in his words.
Warren Haynes, who plays guitar with the Allman Brothers, stepped onstage during one number and put Blues Traveler to shame. When he and Mr. Kinchla dueled, his crying lead guitar lines made Mr. Kinchla's riffs seem cumbersome.
After a percussion-heavy set of earth-embracing acoustic music by Rusted Root, on the second stage, the Allman Brothers Band closed the festival with two and a half hours of relentless Southern rock. Most audience members remained on their feet throughout the entire set. The songs, which lasted as long as 25 minutes, were tight, effective and never too flashy. Even with two drummers, Butch Trucks and Jaimoe, and the percussionist Marc Quinones working at once, the focus was on teamwork, not excess.
The band has admirably weathered the storms of its 26-year career: the death of Duane Allman in 1971, two breakups, and Dickey Betts's downtime in an alcohol-rehabilitation center last year. Its working-class boogie was inspiring when the jams and choruses came together properly, and Gregg Allman's raspy moan and restrained organ romps rarely failed to provide an emotional core beneath the music's hard surface.
The Allman Brothers Band mixed old standbys like "Whipping Post" and "Blue Sky" with songs from its newest album, "Where It All Begins" (Epic), the best of which was the bittersweet "Soulshine." Chris and Rich Robinson of the Black Crowes made a guest appearance to help retool "Southbound," but they had to take a backseat to the interplay between the precise, muscular lines from Mr. Betts's guitar and the fervent responses of Mr. Haynes's.
The Horde festival is to stop at Waterloo in Stanhope, N.J., on Sunday.  POP REVIEW  Correction:  September 3, 1994, Saturday
Because of an editing error, a pop music review yesterday about the Horde tour misidentified the site of the Lollapalooza Festival last month. It was at Downing Stadium on Randalls Island, not at Jones Beach.
Whatever personal reasons may have prompted this reclusiveness, Barber was stylistically at odds with his age, and the age treated such deviance harshly. Modernist critics reviled his music as tired and old-fashioned, meaning, of course, that it didn't sound modernist enough. But now we're in a post-modernist, quasi-Romantic compositional era, and the time is ripe for Barber. Recognition came too late for him to enjoy it, but that is the price of Romantic immortality.
Big holes remain in the Barber discography; we especially need accomplished digital recordings of the operas "Vanessa" and "Antony and Cleopatra." Andrew Schenck, an American conductor who died two years ago, assiduously cultivated the orchestral music, and other conductors, mostly American, have provided alternative versions of major works.
But lately, the more intimate works have come to the fore, especially the solo piano music and the songs. John Browning, Barber's premier pianistic interpreter since the mid-50's, figures prominently in both genres. A Browning CD billed as the complete solo piano music of Barber (Musicmasters 01612-67122) is far and away the best-played, best-recorded of the new collections, and it contains the first recording of the Interlude No. 1, composed when Barber was a student at the Curtis Institute in Philadelphia in the 20's.
But completeness is an elusive goal in Barber's case, and not just in the piano music. There are all sorts of unpublished scores that can be performed or recorded only with the permission of Gian Carlo Menotti, Barber's literary executor. And there are pieces that overlap genres: piano music originally conceived for orchestra, orchestrally accompanied songs and the like.
In the case of the solo piano music, both the English pianist Eric Parkin (Chandos CHAN 9177; CD) and the American Jeffrey Jacob (Centaur CRC 2162; CD) include "Souvenirs" (Op. 28). Conceived for piano duet, it was first performed as an orchestral ballet score and also exists in two-piano and solo piano versions.
Mr. Browning does not include it. Perhaps he finds the solo piano version inferior, or perhaps he discounts the music itself, but the work, described in the New Grove Dictionary of American Music as one "of great simplicity, skirting triviality," has charm. Despite this omission, Mr. Browning is a far more convincing Barberian than the earnest Mr. Parkin or the clipped and brisk Mr. Jacob.
Mr. Browning was also the driving force behind the most prestigious Barber release of recent years, a two-CD set of the "complete" songs, "Secrets of the Old" (Deutsche Grammophon 435 867-2), with Cheryl Studer and Thomas Hampson. The issues of completeness here lie both in inclusions (10 unpublished songs dug out of the Schirmer archives and approved by Mr. Menotti) and exclusions (the songs and dramatic scenes accompanied by forces other than solo piano). Mr. Browning does include "Dover Beach," with Mr. Hampson and the Emerson String Quartet.
Barber came to songwriting through both talent and inheritance. One of his aunts was the noted American contralto Louise Homer; one of his uncles was Sidney Homer, a composer who specialized in songs. The young Barber cultivated his baritone voice, performed in public and recorded "Dover Beach."
The layout on these CD's is basically chronological, affording a kind of autobiography in song. One could push such a parallel too far, but the progression from youthful ease and confidence and Romantic effusion through a growing sophistication and diversity of text selection to the more austere works of Barber's maturity is still striking.
"I think Sam liked the idea of the virtuoso singer," Mr. Browning recalled in an interview in Gramophone magazine. "I've no problem with lieder singers, the small voices and more intimate styles. But Sam, I think, would have really loved the way Cheryl and Tom do these pieces. They need a powerful, strong delivery, and that's what they get here."
Self-promotional, to be sure, but accurate. Mr. Hampson's seamless baritone is especially impressive, blending intimate insight with manly assertiveness in nearly ideal measure. Ms. Studer, too, is a solid, secure, rich-voiced singer and a willing interpreter.
BUT HER performances have to stack up against two other records that suggest some limitations in her work. BMG has released a CD with Leontyne Price, Barber's preferred soprano, singing music from two distinct periods in her career and his (09026-61983). First come excerpts from a 1953 Library of Congress song recital accompanied by the composer that include the world premiere of the "Hermit Songs." Then there are 1968 recordings of "Knoxville: Summer of 1915," which, with its James Agee text evoking the sweet charm and loneliness of American life 80 years ago, may well be Barber's masterpiece, and two arias from "Antony and Cleopatra."
In 1953, Ms. Price sounded girlish and eager in all the right ways, but the 1968 material, accompanied by Thomas Schippers and the New Philharmonia Orchestra, finds her in grander, less fresh voice. So another CD, "Roberta Alexander Sings Samuel Barber" (Etcetera KTC 1145), offers a welcome alternative.
Ms. Alexander's performance of "Knoxville" is even more moving than Ms. Price's. The disk also contains two scenes from "Vanessa," the same two arias from "Antony and Cleopatra" that Ms. Price recorded (again more vulnerable and involving here), the "Andromache's Farewell" scene and three of the songs from the Deutsche Grammophon set, here in their orchestral guises.
All of this is conducted alertly by Edo de Waart, a Dutch maestro with long American experience, with the Netherlands Philharmonic. Ms. Alexander's voice does not have the stentorian gorgeousness of Ms. Price's at her best; she is not the virtuoso Mr. Browning has in mind. But she is a more interior, compelling singer, tender in feeling and sovereign in insight.  RECORDINGS VIEW

The piano part is impressive, to be sure, and it was in excellent hands here once Randall Hodgkinson surmounted some early stiffness. But Carmit Zori, the violinist, seemed content with a halfhearted effort of her own, her intonation occasionally rocking with the waves.
Ernest Chausson's little-known Piano Quartet in A (Op. 30) drew a more committed and cohesive response from all parties, now including Cynthia Phelps, the violist. Here Ms. Zori's slightly acidic edge kept the work's sweetness from growing sickly, and the three string players joined in a lovely sustained unison early in the second movement.
But the finest performance of the evening came in the finest work: Schumann's "Marchenbilder" (Op. 113) for viola and piano. Ms. Phelps, who is the superb principal violist of the New York Philharmonic, is equally adept in chamber music, and she captured Schumann's glinting moods touchingly. Mr. Hodgkinson proved an eminently worthy partner in the full, rich piano part.
The program is to be repeated on Sunday afternoon.  MUSIC REVIEW
Grupo Lora, led by the singer Jhesse Lora, stirred up the crowd for the headliners, playing a mix of cumbias, punta and Mexican regional styles. Central America has absorbed some black music into a framework of the basic Mexican two-step, and the group's rhythms occasionally sounded like reggae or cumbia, but made Central American, driving and dance-floor-effective.
Selena came out next with her band, Los Dinos. Selena (Selena Quintanilla) was introduced as the queen of Tejano music, Spanish music from Texas, and she's just that, the biggest star of the fastest growing Spanish-language music in the United States. Her concerts in Texas regularly draw an audience from all over the north of Mexico and Texas; she's working on her first English language album. Ms. Quintanilla and her band mix the sound of Tex-Mex accordion music with everything from the Pretenders to reggae to techno-dance music. It's a literate combination, and the band -- which has become one of the better dance groups working anywhere, having spent years playing bars -- knows exactly how to rock a house.
And it is easy to see why Ms. Quintanilla has such a large and adoring audience; she obviously loves her job, dancing with the freedom of somebody who has spent a good portion of her life onstage, and singing with a lovely and fluid voice. She and the band roared through material from her newest album, "Amor Prohibido" (EMI Latin), music that sounded completely up to date, but in no way alienated its country, working-class constituency. She had people packed to the front of the stage, and the occasional unconscious audience member was lofted over the front barrier, to be resuscitated backstage.
Los Tigres del Norte, which closed the show, is much more traditional. With two accordionists, an acoustic guitarist, bassist and drummer, the band plays the rural, popular music of Mexico. It juggled the complicated rhythms of Mexican cowboy and country music, and the group's singers left no vowel uncracked in their search for the signs of emotion. It played music that is hugely popular in Mexico, giving the huddled, tired masses working in New York just what it wanted, succor from home.  POP REVIEW
A strong example of his approach is "Turns and Mordents," a flute concerto written in 1976 for Linda Chesis and given repeat performances over the weekend by Ms. Chesis and the Manhattan Chamber Sinfonia. Inspired by James Merrill's poem "From a Notebook," the work moves from restless, intricate figuration (indicated by the title) to a marvelously simple and lucid semi-tonal space in which the flute sings out from a shimmering texture of tremolo strings.
What is most impressive about this work is not its handsomely detailed instrumentation or its ear-teasing interplay of solo flute and ensemble winds but its air of narrative purpose, closely matched to Mr. Merrill's four-stanza poem. A great many works of the last few decades spin out intriguing episodes but arrive at no particular destination. Saylor's long, sighing epilogue and abrupt, colorful flourish had the real sense of an ending.
The Manhattan Chamber Sinfonia, which is affiliated with the Manhattan School of Music, also played Copland's "Appalachian Spring" and Mozart's Symphony No. 41. The program was heard twice, on Friday night at the Manhattan School and on Sunday afternoon at Wave Hill in Riverdale, the Bronx; because of scheduling constraints, I heard the Mozart in Manhattan, the Copland and Saylor at Wave Hill, and I can report that the Chamber Sinfonia is a consistently accomplished student group under Glen Cortese's direction. The Mozart and Copland were given sometimes imprecise but brightly committed performances, and Ms. Chesis played brilliantly in the Saylor concerto. ALEX ROSS
Mr. Buckley has inherited the protean, androgynous vocal instrument of his father, the songwriter Tim Buckley, although he has also been listening to Led Zeppelin's Robert Plant and others. He's not shy about his virtuosity; he unfurls swooping lines that curlicue upward, then loop down with quasi-operatic inflections. Like a soul singer, he also lavishes ornamentation on repeated words, like "baby," or hushes the band so he can sing unaccompanied. He ended his set singing "Hallelujah" (from a Leonard Cohen song) without a microphone. Yet for all its power and control, Mr. Buckley's voice never sounds overbearing; instead, it seems almost humbled by the emotion that pours through it.
There are rhythm-and-blues singers who can match Mr. Buckley's technique, but most of them use their skills to portray love as a realm of simple, escapist sweetness. Mr. Buckley finds turbulence instead; in "Last Goodbye," his determination to break up crumbles when memories and passion overwhelm him, even though he knows better: "It makes me so angry, because I know that in time I'll only make you cry."
Like the Smashing Pumpkins, Mr. Buckley is reinventing psychedelia, this time as a reflection of inner conflict rather than transformed reality. And with his voice, a world of tumult and obsession becomes almost seductive.
The Geraldine Fibbers, who opened Mr. Buckley's C.M.J. Music Marathon showcase, are a Los Angeles band featuring Carla Bozulich, who used to sing with the band Ethyl Meatplow. Her low, sultry voice is perfect for borrowed country songs about distraught characters, and for the band's own material about infatuation and revenge, with songs that build from country and folk-rock to the explosiveness of the Who.
Tindersticks, whose members wore jackets and ties, were more conventional rock romantics, somewhere between Bryan Ferry and the folk-rock side of the American Music Club. Following Mr. Buckley, they sounded overly methodical.  POP REVIEW
Mr. Lara veers between irreconcilable extremes, and on Sunday night he sounded like Elton John for a minute and a wildly creative folk singer the next. He also sang in Spanish and did a Haitian tune, sang pungent melodies accompanying himself on acoustic guitar, then buried his talents under the pounding of a thick-fingered, unimaginative band.
Mr. Lara has studied Afro-Cuban music, and he plays the tres, a six- stringed Cuban guitar, along with a Venezuelan guitar the size of a ukulele. And he sings in an astonishingly seductive voice. When he finds his range, a combination of gorgeous, pealing guitar harmonies and his own flexible voice, he has clearly come up with something new. But he hasn't been able to translate his own rhythmic and harmonic conceptions, or the interplay of the two, into a context that fits comfortably with a band. Piece after piece used cliched power chords to suggest emotion, and what made Mr. Lara distinct became increasingly harder to hear. PETER WATROUS
But what is this? Five new releases of Rachmaninoff's Second Symphony by Russian orchestras with Russian or former Soviet conductors. Four are on Western labels; is it just another example of the new hunger in the Western music world for all things Russian and the reciprocal Russian eagerness to crash the Western cultural marketplace? Or does a genuine enthusiasm for the music lie behind it, either simply in reaction to every last repression of the Soviet regime or because Rachmaninoff's direct emotional appeal and unacademic bent chime with current trends in Russian music?
To judge from the high quality of the performances, some real enthusiasm must be present. Nor are the recordings the whole story. The Philips Classics team, Valery Gergiyev and the Kirov Orchestra (438 864-2; CD), will perform Rachmaninoff's Second at Carnegie Hall this afternoon, just as the RCA Victor team, Yuri Temirkanov and the St. Petersburg Philharmonic (09026-61281-2; CD), did last November.
That the Russians lack a rich continuous tradition in this work is no great loss. The hoary definition of tradition as the last bad performance may never have been more apt than here. For although the hourlong Second, finished in 1907, was originally performed complete in Russia -- even including the repeat of the four-minute exposition in the first movement -- a tradition of cuts grew up in the West in the 1930's.
Rachmaninoff's well-meaning friends, like Bruckner's before them, thought they knew a thing or two about structure and pace that by implication, the composer did not. They lopped out 2 measures here, 76 there and any number more in between. Although a complete recording would issue from Russia now and then, Western performances were all over the map in the number and size of cuts inflicted.
The cuts were often said to have been officially sanctioned by the composer. Here is the sound of sanction, as reported in 1970 by the conductor Eugene Ormandy, an unrepentant trimmer until late in life: "In the first movement, after the introduction, there are four bars vamp until the main theme begins. 'Oh, you can cut two bars there,' Rachmaninoff said. And that was all. That was the only cut he would allow. 'You don't know what cuts do to me,' he said. 'It is like cutting out a piece of my heart.' "
After the Mahler and Bruckner booms in the 60's and the concomitant rise of blockbuster programs, Rachmaninoff's measly hour's length no longer held many terrors for audiences or concert presenters. And a new care (not to say fetish) for the integrity of musical texts, which stemmed largely from the authenticist esthetic of the early-music movement, gave impetus to a new wave of uncut performances of the Second.
YET EVEN NOW, NOTHING CAN BE taken for granted, and the Russians have not been altogether blameless. Four of the recordings here are complete: Mr. Gergiyev's, Mr. Temirkanov's, Mikhail Pletnev's with the Russian National Orchestra (Deutsche Grammophon 439 888-2; CD) and Mariss Jansons' with the St. Petersburg Philharmonic (EMI Classics CDC 5 55140 2; CD). Mr. Gergiyev and Mr. Temirkanov actually take the first-movement repeat. The fifth release, by Yevgeny Svetlanov and the U.S.S.R. Bolshoi Theater Orchestra (Melodiya MEL 46046-2; CD), newly pressed but of unspecified vintage, takes two big cuts in the finale.
And the exasperatingly unpredictable Mr. Temirkanov, who made one of the finest earlier complete recordings of the work (with the Royal Philharmonic for EMI) as well as the excellent new one (taped three years ago), hacked away lustily in Carnegie Hall last year. The more predictable Mr. Gergiyev will presumably do no such thing today.
As if to compensate for earlier abridgments, the current trend in the West seems to be toward glacial expansiveness, as exemplified in 1980's disks by Simon Rattle on EMI and Andre Previn on Telarc. The Russians (and the Latvian Mr. Jansons), on the other hand, seem utterly disinclined to wallow.
Indeed, Mr. Pletnev scarcely lingers. Showing off the splendid Russian National Orchestra, which he founded in 1990, he gives a clear-eyed account of the score that is all fresh energy. Although his pace is well modulated at every point and musicality abounds, an overall sense of unyielding haste eventually sets in. Deutsche Grammophon supplies a nice, compact sound with occasional undue prominence for solo winds.
Although Mr. Temirkanov's earlier recording was also brisk and a bit unyielding, it was thoroughly convincing in its topographical layout, with foothills exquisitely distinguished from peaks. Now, without sacrificing any of his fine attention to structure, he injects enormous freedom, a wonderful ebb and flow, a sense of risk. The end of the first-movement exposition becomes a miniature saga in itself, as Mr. Temirkanov quickens into the crescendo, broadens out the top of the line and finally luxuriates in the slower tempo as if there were no tomorrow. RCA's sound, alas, is a little diffuse and tubby.
Mr. Jansons' recording also follows an earlier one by him (with the Philharmonia Orchestra on Chandos) and resembles it in his rather fussy and disruptive treatment of tempo shifts and his perhaps excessive concern for inner voices. Mr. Jansons seems to apply his own obsessions to the composer's "somewhat obsessive polyphony," in the words of Rachmaninoff's biographer Barrie Martyn. The textures don't always sort themselves out.
The basic animation of all of these recordings, combined with the astringent Russian instrumental sonorities to the extent they survive in the various orchestras represented, keeps the performances well clear of becoming saccharine or maudlin. Mr. Gergiyev's account, in fact, has a consistent rough edge to the playing, with a sonic clarity to match. He whips up real excitement in climaxes and is no less impressive in his handling of quiet passages, but he never quite achieves Mr. Temirkanov's inexorable momentum.
Even at full length, the Rachmaninoff Second leaves a quarter-hour of space on a CD. Mr. Pletnev adds another substantial work, the symphonic fantasy "The Rock." Mr. Jansons offers the early D-minor Scherzo and the "Vocalise" (in Rachmaninoff's full orchestration), Mr. Temirkanov just the "Vocalise" (in Kurt Sanderling's string orchestration).
Mr. Svetlanov's also-ran has its charms, including some of the most pungently Russian sonorities of all in woodwinds and brasses, but given the wealth of attractive, high-powered complete recordings now available, only Rachmaninoff compleatists and profligate spenders are likely to consider a cut performance. My preference among all versions now available is the new Temirkanov, but any of three of these recordings could stand as the last good performance on which to base a new, specifically Russian tradition in the work.  RECORDINGS VIEW
(Another period-instrument series begun more than a decade ago by Derek Solomons and L'Estro Armonico on Saga and CBS ultimately proved abortive. The third current project, by Adam Fischer and the Austro-Hungarian Haydn Orchestra on Nimbus, capitalizes not on "original" instruments but on original ambiance: the recordings are being made, on modern instruments, at Esterhazy Palace, where Haydn first performed many of the symphonies. Meanwhile, Antal Dorati's fine set with the Philharmonia Hungarica, also on modern instruments, has been reissued at midprice by Decca/London.)
Mr. Hogwood's complete recording of the Mozart symphonies with his Academy of Ancient Music was widely hailed in the late 70's as a groundbreaking venture that helped lend respectability to the application of old instruments to Classical music. His Haydn series has just approached the midway point with the release of Volume 6 (L'Oiseau-Lyre 440 222-2; three disks), comprising the early "Sturm und Drang" Symphonies. Mr. Goodman's set with the Hanover Band is also about half complete. His most recent release, Volume 16 (Hyperion CDA 66535; CD), contains Symphonies Nos. 85 through 87.
Mr. Hogwood, in preparing his recordings, has been guided by James Webster, a musicologist at Cornell University. In 1988, Mr. Webster published a controversial article in the journal Early Music questioning the historical justification for the practice, now common in Haydn symphony performances on old instruments, of adding continuo: a doubling of the bass line and harmonies, usually by harpsichord.
"I like hearing the symphonies without the harpsichord continuo, and I would be just the one to hate it," said Mr. Hogwood, who himself played continuo in the Mozart symphony recordings. "I haven't come across any places where I thought a harpsichord would help, and there are a great many movements where you're terribly relieved that the harpsichord isn't plinking away."
MR. WEBSTER marshals strong arguments to support his theory but concedes that no documentary evidence exists to settle the case conclusively. Mr. Hogwood finds a practical argument against the use of continuo. "When we played at Esterhazy, we saw how small the music room there is," he said. "A harpsichord would have taken away half the space for the audience. Besides, they didn't have the harpsichord there. It was at the opera house, and they wouldn't have wanted to move it in and out all the time." Mr. Hogwood uses small forces: six or eight violins and one each of viola, cello and bass. The sound is lean, intimate and very different from that of the Haydn symphony recordings most listeners know.
The ambiguity in the historical record has resulted in a good old-fashioned academic brouhaha centering on the Hogwood recordings. "I am not the only Haydn lover to be dumbfounded by this decision," wrote Robert Dearling, a pro-continuo scholar. "It takes away much of the sound-world of early Haydn and, for me at least, severely detracts from Hogwood's otherwise most musicianly and beautifully played series."
H. C. Robbins Landon, who has for decades been considered the last word in Haydn studies, long insisted on keyboard continuo in the Haydn symphonies; he wrote in 1955 that its omission would be a "grave error." Yet he recently reversed that position.
"There is no evidence that Haydn played harpsichord in the symphonies," he said. He suggested that dispensing with continuo in the symphonies might have been "another of Haydn's innovations, just as he got rid of the harpsichord in the string quartets."
Yet Mr. Goodman remains unimpressed. "Well, good for Robbins Landon," he said testily when informed of this reversal, "but I'm afraid I'm not joining the club." Mr. Goodman stoutly defends his belief that keyboard continuo is necessary in Haydn's symphonies. He regards Mr. Webster's evidence as pure hypothesis, some of it flimsy at that.
"For example, Mr. Webster says that there are no figures for the keyboard in the music," he explained, with reference to the numbers traditionally added below the bass line to spell out the continuo harmonies. "Well, most 18th-century music has no figures. And at the end of his article, he complains that most modern continuo is badly played, and uses that as an argument against its existence. I never heard such an unintellectual argument in my life."
BE THAT AS IT MAY, MR. Goodman's belief in the necessity for continuo is shaped mostly by musical conviction. "There are certain places where I just feel that the music demands it," he said. While laboring under no illusions that his intuition will persuade many scholars, he maintains that musical instinct should carry more weight than a tissue of unprovable scholarly theorizing.
Both Mr. Hogwood and Mr. Goodman cite the music itself as the strongest argument to support their irreconcilable points of view. Mr. Hogwood has grown enormously as a conductor in recent years, and Haydn's symphonies are the repertory perhaps best suited to his style of music-making, which is robust and plain-spoken yet witty and highly civilized. Mr. Goodman's performances are convincing and just as well played as Mr. Hogwood's: not surprising, since many of the Hanover Band players are also in the Academy of Ancient Music.
There is no such thing as a "correct" version of the Haydn symphonies. The continuo question will almost certainly never be settled, unless someone turns up a cache of Haydn letters or other documentary evidence that addresses the issue. What, then, is the prospective purchaser to do? The answer, obviously, is to pick and choose -- to sample the alternative versions and play musicologist.  RECORDINGS VIEW
Contemporary choreographers who try to stage it inevitably find their efforts compared with Michel Fokine's exciting version of 1909. Today, this masterpiece is still occasionally presented by some dance companies as an independent ballet divorced from its operatic context.
Damian Woetzel, a principal dancer of the New York City Ballet, choreographed the New York City Opera's production, which Guido Ajmone-Marsan conducted on Wednesday night. Mr. Woetzel made ingenious use of a small cast, and the steps he devised were always energetic. Honoring the past, he borrowed a few choreographic motifs from Fokine: for instance, sequences for leaping warriors who seem ready to shoot bows, and a scene in which young people slap their bodies with excitement while they cavort.
Ethan Stiefel, a soloist from City Ballet, brought fine elevation to the role of the Polovtsian Chieftain, and there were capable performances by Deanna McBrearty as a Polovtsian Maiden and Anna Liceica as an Oriental Slave.
Yet despite its competence, this choreography never grew wild enough. And Mr. Woetzel made what could be called a stylistic miscalculation: whereas Fokine avoided the use of point steps in his dances for the Polovtsians, Mr. Woetzel put the entire female ensemble on point. As a result, the constant rising upward on the toes helped etherealize choreography that should have looked earthy. JACK ANDERSON
Mr. Parker, a Canadian pianist, clearly has inventiveness in his corner. He also has technique and musicality. His version of Mozart's Sonata in D (K. 311) was the picture of classic gracefulness, with carefully regulated dynamics, fully transparent balances and courtly, almost conversational phrasing. He also gave a decisive performance of the Chopin Sonata No. 3, by turns forceful and fluid.
Mr. Parker was less persuasive in an overly steamy reading of Liszt's "Sonetto del Petrarca," and his version of Ravel's "Jeux d'Eau" tended toward brittleness. But the Mozart, the Chopin and the polystylistic suite left little doubt about his flexibility and interpretive acumen. ALLAN KOZINN
Musically, "Mathew in the School of Life" is hardly a democratic institution. Players have (literally) no voice; most sounds emanate from computers. When characters walk the stage, their footfalls are heard from loudspeakers; teacups rattle electronically; the speech out of their mouths is the single, if varied, voice of Mr. Moran's machines.
The sonic arrangements (made largely of fragments collected from life) are intricate, carefully rehearsed and often quite successful. Mathew's joints do not creak; they whine machinelike with every change of posture. His speech is punctuated by great shrieks or artificial belches. Mild passes at slapstick humor have apprentice robots attempting the art of street-crossing and becoming road kill. Through projected film the robotizing effect of public education on the young is noted.
Mr. Moran's fealty to Philip Glass pops up throughout the evening, most obviously in the stiffly choreographed, repetitive blackout scenes. "Mathew," again, is complicated theater; players and technicians are required to follow machine-driven musical orders with high precision. The methodology argues weakly for free will or the individual. One hopes that Mr. Moran and his director, Bob McGrath, have enough of the sardonic about them to know it.
Mr. McGrath directs non-humans better than he does their keepers. Engineers, repairmen and security agents overacted wildly at a preview last Sunday and greatly compromised the elegant gestures of the androids around them. The latter offer memorable images: a checkout saleswoman and her customers, a two-dimensional bird at Mathew's kitchen window, Mathew thundering away at his computer keyboard.
If Mr. McGrath and his talented colleagues (Laurie Olinder, Fred Tietz, Howard Thies, Elizabeth Evers and Bill Morrison) could temper the occasional eruptions of sophomoric arm-waving and overeager delivery -- also some of the special-delivery social messages (Mathew wears a pricing bar code on his chest) -- they could tighten "Mathew in the School of Life" still further. Subtitled "The Lamb of God," this is Part 1, with another installment to come.  MUSIC REVIEW

Earl Wild is almost 80, but still firm of step and strong of arm, and he came back to New York on Friday to thunder for his faithful following. If this pianist from Pittsburgh lacks introspection, it is not for any lack of dedication to or respect for style. With Mr. Wild, the means seem always a bit more important than the ends. In other words, this is a life devoted to the culture of the piano, with a special reverence for Romanticism's florid use of it. Could this be why Mr. Wild's musical spirit has trouble penetrating much deeper?
Friday's program was, indeed, an homage to the instrument's ability to create ethereal illusions as well as detonations of virtuosity. Four Chopin waltzes were paradigms of how a mighty technique can evoke reticence in the largest of halls. The shining tone of Rachmaninoff's G-major Prelude marked Mr. Wild as a marvelous engineer of keyboard sound. At the end of Mendelssohn's Rondo Capriccioso, music abruptly gave way to acrobatics. In an arrangement from Chopin's Piano Concerto No. 2, Mr. Wild's delicate hesitations in the Larghetto honored a century of pianistic mannerism, though often at the cost of forward motion.
There were unhappy moments: confusion at the end of the Bach-Tausig D-minor Toccata and Fugue, and a bad memory slip in the finale of Beethoven's "Pathetique" Sonata. For doubters of Mr. Wild's durability, however, there was also the Ravel "Alborada del Gracioso," whose wicked repeated notes had a clarity one could scarcely believe.  BERNARD HOLLAND  IN PERFORMANCE
The second half opened with the pianist Marty Napoleon, backed by Mr. Calabrese and Mr. Williams. Mr. Napoleon charged his improvisations with rhythms that piled up on each other, and Mr. Williams, who plays with the grace of a dancer, responded. They were followed by the alto saxophonist Benny Waters, who at 93 might be the oldest jazz musician still performing. And performing well: on a blues, he used high piercing notes and low, muffled ones to expand the improvisation's rhetoric.
The concert closed with a set of duets featuring Mr. Cheatham and Mr. Grey, including "Mood Indigo" and "Sunday." Both are spare soloists, and the music was a pure example of a nearly lost art in jazz, the editing process.  JAZZ REVIEW
Ms. Toth's program also included a couple of selections from John Blow (the Ground in D Minor and the duet "When I Drink") and Henry Lawes's "Sweet Echo," arranged for viola da gamba. The evening ended with a longer work by Matthew Locke, "The Mask of Orpheus," a bright, efficient telling of the Orpheus tale that did not plumb the depths but provided handsome lyric turns for a quartet of voices.  The songs were nicely matched by mood and subject.
The singers were Jessica Tranzillo, a soprano, Timothy Leigh Evans, a tenor, and Paul Shipper, a bass, assisted by Grant Herreid, a tenor, in "The Mask of Orpheus." They all sang intelligently and idiomatically, although both Ms. Tranzillo and Mr. Shipper had trouble in the upper range; Mr. Evans's small but refined voice was the most attractive. Ms. Toth led a small ensemble of lutes, viola da gamba and harpsichord; Lisa Terry was the excellent viol soloist. ALEX ROSS  IN PERFORMANCE
This weekend, the company returns to New York City for what it calls its "Bar Mitzvah Season." (Performances are at the Kaye Playhouse, Hunter College, 68th Street between Park and Lexington Avenues, tomorrow night at 8 and Sunday at 7; next Friday and Saturday nights at 8.)
The company's 13th birthday, though, could be its last. There are reports that Ira Siff, the founder and artistic director (who bears an uncanny resemblance to Ms. Galupe-Borszkh), may have trouble keeping the troupe together. So these could be the last chances to catch the company's classic interpretation of the second act of "Tosca," its shopping-mall version of "Der Rosenkavalier" and excerpts from Rossini's "Donna del Lago" that may prove the score really is unsingable. There will even be a tribute to "The Three Tenors" and what the company calls "other multi-million-dollar lapses in taste." Watching La Gran Scena's lapses will cost $20 to $35; tickets can be ordered by telephone: (212) 772-4448. EDWARD ROTHSTEIN
There are dangers and sadness in Ms. Williams's private universe, and, in songs like "I Can't Cry Hard Enough" (by David Williams and Marvin Etzioni), a clear consciousness of death. Yet it's an optimistic place, where love arrives sooner or later and Christian faith provides consolation. Ms. Williams has multiple sclerosis; her guests performed her songs on "Sweet Relief" (Chaos/ Sony), a benefit album to help pay her medical expenses.
Illness has not impaired her performing. Ms. Williams's voice is a high soprano with a Louisiana twang and a fragile, girlish quaver. Singing standards like "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" and "Moon River," she made each line a delighted discovery; she borrowed a slide from Billie Holiday or a flutter from Mildred Bailey, but she sang like a little girl wise beyond her years. As casual as she seemed, each song was poised, with a delicacy rooted in pure stubbornness.
POP REVIEW
Perhaps because they both capture Mendelssohn's compositional deftness and spirit of fantasy so vividly, the "Italian" Symphony and the incidental music for "A Midsummer Night's Dream" make a natural pairing both on record and in concert. Kurt Masur led the New York Philharmonic in both works at a 1991 festival concert at Tilles Center at the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University, two months before he officially took up the orchestra's reins. He revived the program on Thursday evening and will conduct it again tonight.
This is music that brings out the best from Mr. Masur and, in turn, from the Philharmonic. In both works the strings danced nimbly through the fast movements and sang in the slow ones. The winds produced the transparent timbres that give these scores much of their magic, and the brass was in exceptionally fine form. Philip Myers gave a velvety, beautifully shaped account of the horn solo in the Nocturne of "A Midsummer Night's Dream," and in that work's more regal sections the trumpets played with gleaming solidity.
"A Midsummer Night's Dream" was heard with narration and stretches of Shakespearean dialogue, not so much to convey the story as to put the music in context. Elizabeth McGovern narrated, hopping valiantly between characters and distinguishing them without overacting. A microphone would have been helpful: she was not up to filling Avery Fisher Hall, and the brisk pace of her readings sometimes took a toll on clarity.
Lisa Saffer, soprano; Gwendolyn Lentz, mezzo-soprano, and the New York Choral Artists made brief but lovely contributions.  ALLAN KOZINN  IN PERFORMANCE
Starting with Armstrong's first recorded solo, "Chimes Blues" from 1923, and ending with "Song of the Vipers" from 1934, this set surveys the formative years of Armstrong's career, years that parallel the rise of America as a world cultural power. The set consists of 81 recordings that profoundly influenced the nature of popular music; without Armstrong, the bravura of improvisation would be radically restrained. The set comes with a fine essay by the jazz scholar Dan Morgenstern; it's all part of a blossoming industry in Armstrong. PETER WATROUS  POP MUSIC
The Band -- four Canadians and a drummer from Arkansas -- invented music for a mythic old-time America. They fused juke-joint rhythm-and-blues, mountain ballads, gospel hymns and honky-tonk hollers with lyrics steeped in history and private enigmas. Two of the three disks winnow the Band's albums well. The third loosens up its perfectionism. It collects rarities, including songs recorded in the early 1960's, when the group was called the Hawks, and by the Band at the 1969 Woodstock festival. All that's missing is a sampling of the Band backing Bob Dylan, the collaboration that unleashed the best in all concerned. JON PARELES  POP MUSIC
Most of the 36 songs on this anthology were recorded during the peak years of Ms. King's popularity, in the early 1970's when the frizzy-haired singer, songwriter and pianist personified an urban earth mother dispensing common-sense wisdom with a rock-and-roll beat. Although today that image seems a bit quaint, the songs and Ms. King's artlessly heartfelt singing still appeal.  Included are all the songs from her 14 million selling album, "Tapestry," highlights from seven other solo albums and two cuts from an obscure 1968 album, "Now That Everything's Been Said." S. H.  POP MUSIC
This three-hour time warp served to remind audiences that programs ran much longer in the 19th century than they do in the 20th, although those who regularly attend Mr. Botstein's well-stuffed concerts might not have noticed the difference. It also promoted discussion on Mr. Botstein's favorite talking point, unjust obscurity. Stenhammar and d'Albert have not remained in the repertory; Rubinstein is no longer beloved. The audience was invited to judge who had erred, history or Strauss.
Unfortunately, Strauss happened not to choose the best works by which these composers could be remembered. Stenhammar had yet to write his quirky, distinctive Second Piano Concerto; this earlier effort is badly in need of editing and hopelessly indebted to Brahms. Rubinstein's "Ocean" Symphony is interesting as an early landmark of Russian symphonic style, but its melodically sumptuous opening movements are let down by a bland Scherzo and Finale. The d'Albert is late-Romantic fluff.
Mr. Botstein made a good case for his obscurities all the same, drawing enthusiastic playing from the orchestra. Blanca Uribe managed well in the difficult solo part of the Stenhammar; Dominique Labelle applied her bright, accurate soprano to the bizarre vocal assortment, which also included Rubinstein's "Gelb rollt mir zu Fussen," Schubert's "Pastorella al Prato" and Strauss's "Standchen." ALEX ROSS  IN PERFORMANCE

Though nothing about them is specific to the Christmas season, Monteverdi's Vespers of 1610 make an interesting alternative to the standard seasonal offerings. They begin, after all, with a festive burst, a "Deus in adjutorium" that recycles the Toccata with which Monteverdi opened "Orfeo" three years earlier. And the rest of the settings -- psalms, liturgical poetry and a Magnificat -- vary from the intensely devotional to the nearly ecstatic.
Dennis Keene led his Ascension Music Chorus and Orchestra on Tuesday in a performance that did Monteverdi's complex, exquisitely harmonized choral writing full justice. The chamber choir was at its most perfectly blended in the score's moments of contemplative serenity.
There was some fine solo singing as well, and to his credit, for the solo and duet sections, Mr. Keene stepped off the podium and let the singers and continuo players perform as a chamber ensemble. Especially pleasing among the singers was Thom Baker, a tenor with an appealing tone and the agility to produce early Baroque ornamentation. Kathy Etherington and Susanne Peck, sopranos, also sang movingly.
The orchestra was a combination of Baroque instruments (the recorders and early brass instruments required for the light, bright sound Monteverdi sometimes demands) and modern strings. The continuo group was varied, with theorbo, harpsichord and organ supporting the movements to which they were best suited. Occasional sour notes emerged from the brass and in an otherwise gorgeous violin duet during the closing Magnificat. But for the most part the musicians supported the choristers ably and matched them in spirit and energy.  ALLAN KOZINN  IN PERFORMANCE
Mr. Brown placed three pieces by Marc-Antoine Charpentier under the title "A Royal Christmas With Louis XIV at Ste.-Chapelle," this, he reasons, being the kind of music that a French king at the turn of the 18th century might have heard at vespers or at midnight Mass. The music was "In Navitatem Domini Nostri Jesu Christi," the Magnificat a Trois for male voices and the familiar and much-loved Messe de Minuit pour Noel.
Charpentier adds to a formal and dignified musical style an uncharacteristic sweetness. His music loves to rock back and forth in triple-time. The edges have a softened, welcoming feel. The Magnificat magnifies these qualities with its repeated stanzas over a falling four-note bass. Both pieces around it presented Christmas as something comforting, untroubled by boisterousness or a sense of triumph.
Mr. Brown led his three-on-a-part chorus and excellent little period-instrument band standing at a portable organ set in front of them. For the mass, two recorders joined the strings. Almost all of the singers had solo moments, but they are quite good ensemble singers. Period-instrument concerts can often claim authenticity of means and of style but not of place. St. Mary's discreet echo served history's purposes well. The concert repeats on Tuesday night. BERNARD HOLLAND  IN PERFORMANCE
Streetwise Weill -- Francesca Zambello's production of Kurt Weill's "Street Scene" brought urban Americana at its photo-realistic best to the Houston Grand Opera last January. Weill's cast of characters offered a supermarket of Depression-era neighborhood life. Houston's street-front sets, designed by Adrianne Lobel, looked as if you could walk right into them. Honing a Britten Specialty -- The Metropolitan Opera has a reputation for museum displays, but it managed to portray Britten's great "Death in Venice" with an aphoristic, elegant staging. Swift and relentless, and beautifully sung, Colin Graham's production, which opened in February, has added to the company's strong Britten repertory. Finding Humor in Shostakovich -- Graham Vick's direction and Paul Brown's set and costume conceptions in Shostakovich's "Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk" at the Metropolitan Opera last month showed audiences that vicious opera can be viciously funny as well. Maria Ewing's wailing Katerina was a triumph of casting. Swan Song -- A note on swans, namely the stately, subdued robotic bird that graced Stephen Wadsworth's production of Wagner's "Lohengrin" at the Seattle Opera last summer: Would that human operatic performers acted so well.  THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: CLASSICAL MUSIC/1994
After the guitar quartet, Mr. Sharp presented a piece composed for the Soldier String Quartet. As the group fiddled, sawed and slowly bowed its instruments to create a sound similar to that of a fitful subway train, Mr. Sharp bent over a digital processor and electronically manipulated the music. Unfortunately, the live sound of the instruments drowned out Mr. Sharp's pyrotechnics and the piece never crystallized.
The evening ended with a performance by Mr. Sharp's group Carbon, an ever-changing ensemble that is over a decade old. Lately, Carbon has been a vehicle for Mr. Sharp to experiment with rock songs. With Marc Sloan playing bass, Joseph Trump on drums, David Weinstein on keyboards and sampler, and Mr. Sharp on clarinet, vocals and his guitar-bass, the band moved through hard funk, free jazz, heavy metal and industrial noise without ever sounding derivative. Mr. Sharp's fast, fragmented, strident style of playing worked well in the context of a rock ensemble, and he was able to create engaging textures and add punch to each piece.  POP REVIEW

As sometimes happens though, critical and popular tastes diverged. Of the year's 10 top-selling albums, only one -- "Dookie" by Green Day -- appears on the top 10 lists of the Times music critics. For that matter, there is little agreement among the critics themselves. Chalk it up to the specialization of musical styles, the tastes of individual critics or -- more to the point -- the strengths of the albums listed below.
"Warmdaddy in the Garden of Swing," Wessell Anderson (Atlantic). A meticulously and lyrically composed selection of tunes, performed by Wynton Marsalis's often overlooked saxophonist, Wess Anderson.
"J. C. on the Set," James Carter (DIW/Columbia). It's hard to find as extroverted a musician as Mr. Carter, a saxophonist who is after drama and brute force. He's also one of the few of the younger musicians in jazz to investigate both the sonic possibilities of 60's avant-garde expressionism and the swing tradition.
"Revelation," Cyrus Chestnut (Atlantic). Gospel and blues and jazz mixed by this pianist in sheer unbridled joy. Mr. Chestnut plays with a healthy respect for dynamics, giving the record a richness that is rare to hear.
"Can You Hear a Motion," Marty Ehrlich (Enja). This may be this saxophonist's most satisfying record yet, swinging, thoughtful and well considered, its formal ploys making the music ring with compositional depth.
"Black Art," Darrell Grant (Criss Cross). Mr. Grant, a pianist, has assembled an album, featuring Christian McBride on bass and Brian Blade on drums, that is conceived from the rhythm section's point of view, with all sorts of changing tempos and textures. The trumpeter Wallace Roney turns in what may be his most exciting playing on record.
"Five Chord Stud," Julius Hemphill (Black Saint). Mr. Hemphill's arranging produces a sound like no other in jazz, creamy and thick and pungent. He has assembled his unaccompanied saxophone sextet, and the music is as distinct as ever.
"Dance World Dance," Rodney Kendrick (Verve). This eccentric, searching record by Rodney Kendrick, a pianist, gives an early 1960's thrill. It's spacious, open music.
"In This House, on this Morning," Wynton Marsalis (Columbia). It's not his finest extended work, but it's ambitious and learned, filled with Mr. Marsalis's distinct musical vocabulary.
"Song for (Septet)," Mario Pavone (New World). Salty compositions and fine improvisations by Marty Ehrlich and Tom Chapin make this Mr. Pavone's best album yet. It's a call to the brave new world of the early 1980's, when swing and experimentation were brought together, but minus the boredom.
"The Journey," Danilo Perez (Novus). Mr. Perez can be an astonishingly inventive pianist; this album captures not only his piano improvisations, but also his ambitions as a composer. In the form of a suite, the exciting, percussive music follows the experience of slaves in the Hispanic New World.
The rationale behind "Canzonetta," a motley collection of mostly Italian songs, dances, instrumental church pieces, lute solos and variations, is that the boundary between instrumental and vocal music was porous in the 16th century.
None of this will strike early-music fanciers as hot news, but never mind: the King's Noyse, a six-year-old American string and vocal ensemble, has included many gems among the 32 pieces on this well-packed disk, and the variety in style and scoring makes for a pleasing program.
A highlight is a simple, plaintive account of Cipriano de Rore's "Ancor Che col Partire," followed by an ingeniously articulated set of violin variations on the song, composed and played by the ensemble's director, David Douglass, and the lutanist Paul O'Dette.
Mr. O'Dette also contributes fluid, shapely renderings of two groups of anonymous Italian dances, and the ensemble's strings prove versatile colorists in works that range from Orazio Vecchio's dark-hued "Mostrav' in Ciel" to a group of bright, robust anonymous dances from the Bottegari Lutebook.
The ensemble's soprano, Ellen Hargis, is an expressive singer who knows how to color a phrase affectingly, and if her voice is not conventionally beautiful, its timbre is well suited to this music. ALLAN KOZINN
As it turned out, the music itself was more sensation than substance, and was more often like a movie score than a powerful exploration of ideas or emotion. But the cheers should not be dismissed; the music's surface provided authentic thrills, and they deserve recognition. Mr. Schwantner has been preoccupied throughout his career with the sharp edges of sound, not the lyricism of the swelling string played by the bow, say, but the sudden impact made by sound protruding from silence. Here he turned that preoccupation into an obsession.
The percussion includes a battery of instruments ranging from the glockenspiel and marimbas to a water gong, Japanese wind chimes, cowbells and a shekere (beaded gourd). It provides the energy of this three-movement concerto, while the rest of the orchestra offers support, accompaniment and commentary. The work, dedicated to the memory of the composer Stephen Albert, seems to be a meditation on death in which the soloist is the mourner.
The middle movement is an elegy titled "In Memoriam" in which the percussionist stands center stage, ringing changes on Minimalist patter produced on a vibraphone and cowbells, and ritualistically intoning heartbeats on a bass drum. The two outer movements, in which the soloist joins other members of the percussion section toward the rear, invoke moments of rage and dismay. There are echoes of Wagner and Philip Glass, as well as suggestions of suspense cinema. There was always enough sonic inventiveness to keep the ears busy, but the overall impact was not profound; there was no genuine catharsis, let alone a sense of anything more than simple emotional effects being assembled. The impact was greater than the sum of its parts because of the stunning versatility and rambunctious energy of Mr. Lamb, the Philharmonic's principal percussionist. This concerto is a virtuoso showpiece, and that helped account for its success.
Some measure of the kinds of complexity and subtlety the piece lacked were provided by a warhorse, Tchaikovsky's Fifth Symphony, which also received cheers on Friday. In this music, every emotion has shades of nuance, sometimes incorporating opposites in a single phrase. Each climax is a catharsis as well as a beginning. Mr. Slatkin, by avoiding all hints of sentimentality, made this work seem a powerful and intelligent meditation. This pungent interpretation was distinguished by an extraordinary poise.
That poise, in which precision of execution was matched by a firm sense of rhythm and a natural sense of phrase, marked all of Mr. Slatkin's conducting, beginning with three arrangements of early-17th-century works by Giovanni Gabrieli (Sonata XIII, "Hodie completi sunt" and Sanctus VI). Three antiphonal choirs of brass took over the vocal and instrumental lines, their conversation and counterpoint constructing an imposing musical space. The strange acoustics of Avery Fisher Hall, in which instruments seemed to wander and come from unexpected places, added a hint of Surrealism to the grandeur.
The concert will be repeated tomorrow night.  MUSIC REVIEW
Donald Joyce, an enterprising organist whose programs typically offer something new or unusual, has been contemplating the music of Philip Glass lately. He recorded an album of Mr. Glass's works for Catalyst, the new-music arm of RCA Records, in 1993, and on Monday afternoon he performed most of the works from that album in a lunchtime recital.
Mr. Glass has not written much music specifically for solo organ, but the instrument's sound, or a crude exaggeration of it, has always been central to his work. His early ensemble pieces, after all, are built around the raspy, reedy sound of a Farfisa electric organ. When Mr. Glass replaced those instruments with synthesizers, he expanded his palette at a slight but perceptible cost in character.
The organ at St. Paul's produces a grand, colorful sound well beyond that of either of Mr. Glass's electronic instruments. But Mr. Joyce made the sound of a full organ seem ideally suited to the slowly expanding figuration and thickening textures of "Contrary Motion" (1969), the rippling arpeggiations of "Dance IV" (1979) and the melancholy swirl of "Mad Rush" (1979). And if the finale of "Satyagraha" (1980) lost something in the translation from the operatic stage to the keyboard, the arrangement by Michael Riesman captured the work's dignified spirit.
There is a degree to which this music speaks for itself. As each piece cycles its way through its comparatively simple, repeating materials, details fade and phantom melodies and rhythmic relationships emerge. Mr. Joyce produced this effect with the skill of an illusionist. His coloration was rich, but textural changes were subtle. Yet there were moments when Mr. Joyce's playing suggested that this music can sound as grandly Romantic, and as moving, as Vierne or Widor.  ALLAN KOZINN  IN PERFORMANCE
The quartet, all with long, well-groomed tresses and exposed chest hair, played a slightly sweetened version of the speed-metal that it helped popularize, with hard, fast riffs punctuated by high, screeching solos. The drumming was intense, full of shivering cymbals and rigid bass thumps, and often changed tempo during choruses. Mr. Mustaine's lyrics, sung in either a high wail reminiscent of Robert Plant of Led Zeppelin or a low rasp like a demon with a head cold, were usually overpowered by the music, rendering unintelligible his display of French on the corny deathbed lament, "A Tout le Monde" and his display of his punk-rock roots during a pumped-up version of the Sex Pistols song "Anarchy in the U.K."
In addition to displaying its power on Friday night, Megadeth was willing to share it. The group had let its fans decide its set list by asking them to vote for their favorites songs on the Internet. The result was a fair mix of music spanning Megadeth's 11-year career, with only four songs from "Youthanasia." In addition, the first 200 concertgoers who brought 10 pounds of food for the poor were allowed to meet the band backstage after the show.
Where Megadeth offered its listeners escape in fantasies of death and omnipotence, Corrosion of Conformity, a politically charged quartet from Raleigh, N.C., who opened the show, played hard-rock that offered sufferers no hiding place. In fast, loud, abrasive songs like "Albatross," "Broken Man" and "Deliverance," all full of compressed metal solos and all from its most recent album, "Deliverance" (Columbia), Corrosion of Conformity repudiated notions of transcendence and redemption and offered those looking for escape only one word of advice: "Run."
ROCK REVIEW
On Monday night at the Dance Theater Workshop, A. Leroy opened a strange sort of song book, one that seemed more like a scrapbook. A newspaper obituary, a sermon by a Baptist minister, a speech from a John Wayne movie and dozens of versions of an old folk song were all glued to its pages. The title of the performance was "Last Forever," and the theme was American folk songs.
Mr. Leroy, best known as a composer, rearranged traditional numbers by pasting different recorded versions together, tossing in verses from related songs and adding and subtracting lyrics so the songs ended the way he thought they should. Because recorded history has replaced oral history, Mr. Leroy was not just modifying folk songs, he was participating in the folk tradition.
His band was not made up of the instruments one would expect in an ensemble playing American folk. Mr. Leroy played a spinet, Bill Ruyle played harmonium and hammer dulcimer, Abby Newton played cello and Carolyn Dutton played violin. One result was that most of the music sounded sparse and fragile, especially when combined with the singing of Sonya Cohen, who added a soft, sweet spin to songs like the chilling "In the Pines" and the quirky "Nursery Rhyme."
Mr. Leroy prefaced almost every song with a story about what inspired him to perform it or rewrite it, from the obscure field recording that the ballad "Bachelor's Hall" was based on to the timeless emotions in the infectious pop love song "Duke of Earl." The music, from the clicking keys of the spinet to the droning of the harmonium to the uptempo violin romps, showed that the boundaries of folk music are always growing. The question-and-answer period afterward -- which ended with a debate on whether toilet seats should be left up or down -- showed that it's best that those borders not grow too quickly to incorporate modern times. NEIL STRAUSS  IN PERFORMANCE
Young jazz musicians tend to become infatuated with an era or a style and dive right into it, reproducing, tinkering, making it sound new again. Antonio Hart, an alto saxophonist who is performing with his quintet through Sunday, loves the sound of the late 1950's and early 60's. He has added structure and new details to that music, while remaining fairly true to its original intent.
The vanguard music of the time was exploratory and extroverted, and interested in power and energy. Mr. Hart's band used freely improvised sections: duets between Mr. Hart and the drummer, Nasheed Waits; static ostinatos; driving swing, and great quivering chunks of silence between sections. At times Mr. Hart evoked the sound of John Coltrane, from his Impulse period, and at times the band sounded like some of the more adventurous bands Blue Note Records was recording in the 1960's.
Mr. Hart had added formal details to the raw material, and the music was complicated. He's an ambitious writer, and his pieces, elongated and full of digressions and changes of mood, tempo and intensity, are almost epic in proportion. In a piece called "Riots," he set riffs against swinging sections, and silence against dense band interplay.
It was difficult music, and Mr. Hart and his band weren't quite ready for it all. At times the music's reach outstripped the band's ability to make it all coherent, and on more than one occasion, the soloists chattered on longer than they should have. But Mr. Hart is on to something, and his experiment is worth following. PETER WATROUS  IN PERFORMANCE
Mostly, Ms. Stutzmann's winning stage manner and her ear for seductive coloration carried the evening. In Schumann's "Venezianisches Lied No. 1," for example, she ended each verse with a ravishing pianissimo, and the most eyebrow-raising moment in a gorgeous account of "Widmung" was an ornamental turn in which every note was cleanly articulated. She glided easily through the sensual chromaticism of Debussy's "Beau Soir" and "La mer est plus belle." And her readings of Poulenc's "Voyage a Paris" and "Les Chemins de l'Amour" were beautifully characterized.
Ms. Stutzmann's able, deferential accompanist was Inger Sodergren. After offering Ravel's "Chanson Francaise" and English and Scottish folk ballads as encores, Ms. Stutzmann joined Ms. Sodergren at the keyboard for a lively account of one of the Brahms Op. 39 Waltzes.  MUSIC REVIEW
Sonic Boom's credo seemed to be less is more. When he played guitar, he repeated chords for so long that overtones rang in the air. When he played keyboards, he sometimes taped down the keys so that the chords could drone longer. His lyrics, mostly spoken in a breathy daze and filled with questions like "How does it feel?" seemed to come from the point of view of a doctor conducting a psychedelic experiment. This impression was only heightened by Sonic Boom's exacting methodology, which included walking around in the middle of a piece, adjusting the controls on guitar-effects boxes and scrupulously modulating feedback to create each song's fade-out.
Air Miami, which opened the show, is the new band formed by Mark Robinson and Bridget Cross, formerly of Unrest. The songs were new, but the music was similar to Unrest's recent recordings: a mix of slowly droning ballads and quickly strummed pop songs. The group's songs were minimal, like Spectrum's. But instead of using feedback as an instrument, Air Miami used treble. NEIL STRAUSS
Tuva is where Siberia meets Outer Mongolia, and the Tuvans, like some of their Mongolian neighbors and like Tibetan Buddhist monks, sing according to age-old methods that are marvels of applied physics. Their throat-singing techniques, called khoomei, allow them to produce multiple tones simultaneously: a low growl, an eerie whistling melody of changing overtones and sometimes a harmony note in between.
Huun-Huur-Tu, formed in 1992, is a traditionalist group that slightly updates old songs. Most of the concert was drawn from its current album, "The Orphan's Lament" (Shanchie). Its four members accompanied themselves on traditional Tuvan stringed instruments, including an igil (vertical fiddle), doshpulur (a banjolike lute) and byzaanchi (a cellolike bowed instrument), all topped with carved horse's heads; sometimes the doshpulur was replaced by a guitar. There was also a frame drum borrowed from shaman rituals and a rattle made of a bull's scrotum. A khomuz, the Tuvan jaw-harp, broke after a few twangs of a solo.
Huun-Huur-Tu is named after the open countryside, and its music is tied to natural sounds: birds, wind, whinnying horses, buzzing insects. The group has met Western listeners partway, keeping songs short and varied; some sound like Appalachian rural tunes from half a world away. But from songs about the loneliness of a nomad far from home to evocations of taiga forests, Huun-Huur-Tu's repertory still evokes lives that were lived close to the land.
Huun-Huur-Tu is to perform on Monday night at the Knitting Factory, 74 Leonard Street, TriBeCa, and will lead a throat-singing workshop next Tuesday at Lotus Studios, 109 West 27th Street, Chelsea. JON PARELES
Being a flexible group that covers the Baroque and Classical repertories, the Grande Bande is often truer to its name than it was on Saturday. This time it was petite: at full force it included three violinists (Robert Seletsky, Peter Kupfer and Olga Gussow, with Mr. Kupfer and Ms. Gussow also playing violas) and a bass viol player (Patricia Ann Neely), with Mr. Renz directing from the harpsichord and Tamara Matthews the soprano soloist.
Ms. Matthews produces a smooth, lovely sound, and like many early-music singers, she uses only a hint of expressive vibrato. In her more stately selections -- "Incassum, Lesbia, Rogas," "If Music Be the Food of Love," "O, Let Me Weep" and her encore, "When I Am Laid in Earth" -- Ms. Matthews sang with a quiet intensity that pointed up Purcell's power to tug at the heart by combining simplicity and beauty.
But Purcell's brighter side was on display, too. Mr. Renz, playing a droning hurdy-gurdy, accompanied Ms. Matthews in a vibrant account of Purcell's version of an old Scottish folk tune, "Cold and Raw." And the string players, in varying configurations, touched on both the introspective and outgoing qualities in a handful of fantasies, sonatas and dances. There were ragged moments here and there, but mostly the playing was stylishly fleet and well-focused. ALLAN KOZINN  IN PERFORMANCE
What does it take for a song to win an Oscar? Listening to the collection, it is clear just how conceptually removed the movie song has always been from other commercial categories. Like the Hollywood film, the movie song deals in larger-than-life images. Love affairs expand into grand passions and everyday trials into heroic struggle.
Especially in the 1950's, movie songs like "High Noon" "Three Coins in the Fountain" and "Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing" were often grandiose promotions of the vehicles they were named after. The contemporary movie song may have stopped depicting love in such flowery terms, but its retreat from lofty sentimentality is only a matter of degree.
Even now, when disenchantment and anger are the order of the day in mainstream rock and hip-hop, Hollywood still favors middle-of-the-road ballads exalting true love and happy endings. Stevie Wonder's "I Just Called to Say I Love You" and Lionel Richie's "Say You, Say Me" would probably have been hits without being in films, since Mr. Wonder and Mr. Richie were such big recording stars in the 1980's. But without the mass exposure of a hit movie, "Up Where We Belong" from "An Officer and a Gentleman" (1982), "Take My Breath Away" from "Top Gun" (1986) and "A Whole New World" from "Aladdin" (1992) would almost certainly have fought uphill battles to be heard.
The more you study the winners and losers, the odder many of the choices seem. How did it happen that in 1937, "Sweet Leilani," a forgettable piece of Hawaiian kitsch sung by Bing Crosby, beat out two certified standards, "They Can't Take That Away From Me" and "That Old Feeling"? How was it, 20 years later, that Elvis Presley's title hit from "Jailhouse Rock" wasn't even nominated?
In the earliest years, the winning songs tended to be sophisticated, escapist musical comedy numbers performed by singers who were also dancers like Astaire, Dick Powell and Bob Hope.
"Over the Rainbow" (1939) ushered in a period when romantic frivolity was superseded by more wistful and anxious late-Depression and prewar ballads. After World War II, breezy, happy-go-lucky novelties took over. The mid-50's were dominated by starchy formal ballads; Henry Mancini's wins in 1961 and '62 with "Moon River" and "Days of Wine and Roses" cleared the stuffy air, bringing in a more informal, folksier style of movie song.
Thereafter, the winners came out of a grab bag of pop styles. Isaac Hayes's propulsive "Theme From 'Shaft,' " in 1971, was the closest that the best song winner ever came to a streetwise hipness. "Last Dance," in 1978, and "Fame," in 1980, acknowledged disco. But in arguably the most glaring omission ever, none of the songs from the ultimate disco movie, "Saturday Night Fever," were even nominated.
THE MOST SIGNIFICANT thread of continuity running through the collection is the Disney song. The first one to win, in 1940, was "When You Wish Upon a Star," which is heard being sung in its original soundtrack version by Cliff Edwards. Recently, after a long hiatus, the Disney song has begun to monopolize the category. In three of the last five years, the winners were songs written by Alan Menken and Howard Ashman for "The Little Mermaid," "Beauty and the Beast" and "Aladdin." In the recently announced 1994 nominations, three of the five contenders are songs from "The Lion King."
A flaw in the collection is that some of the most famous versions of songs could not be licensed. In addition to Mr. Havens singing Mr. Springsteen's song, you get Tommy Edwards (not Doris Day) singing "Secret Love," Shirley Bassey (not Barbra Streisand) doing "The Way We Were" and Paul Williams's (not Ms. Streisand's) "Evergreen."
But if it's only the songs you want, all 60 of them are here in their Technicolor glory evoking whole new worlds wished on a star, over the rainbow just behind the silver screen.  RECORDINGS VIEW
At times, particularly in the Prokofiev, there were hints of more potential in the lovely sonority given hushed treble passages or in the creation of arched phrases at double-forte volumes (not an easy task). There were also flashes of compelling fervor during the work's climaxes, providing clues to what has excited other listeners.
But throughout the recital, imagination and insight were in short supply. The elastic ornamentations of the Ballade were played with routine regularity. The minute tensions and astonishing nuances in Beethoven's Opus 7 Sonata were homogenized, so little seemed at stake. Even the angular Prokofiev sonata, with which Mr. Korsantiya had the strongest identification, emerged as a series of episodes that fell into two distinct states: introspective dream and aggressive declamation. Emphasis was put on sleek delivery and big effects, but the biggest effects were overlooked; they lay in the smallest details.  MUSIC REVIEW
On Monday, though the keyboards remained, the guitar was used to achieve the effect they once had, adding catchy, repetitive hooks and atmospheric sounds. Unfortunately, Mr. Burchill's riffs in concert (though not on the new album) sounded as trite and insubstantial as the guitar solos of the ballad-singing heavy-metal bands that also flourished in the mid-1980's. But the focus of the music was on the singing of Mr. Kerr, who alternated between whispering thick, gentle lines of sincerity and loud, emotionally charged moans reminiscent of Bono of U2.
The band trotted out its gushing synthesizers to play extended versions of past anthems like "Don't You (Forget About Me)," "Waterfront," "Sanctify Yourself" and "Alive and Kicking," but most of the time it stuck to material from the new album, adding only a pumped-up version of the Velvet Underground song "White Light/White Heat" for an encore.
If Simple Minds' past hits seemed forever bound up in the pimply teen-age romances of John Hughes films like "The Breakfast Club" (the soundtrack of which featured the group), their new ones, despite all of Mr. Kerr's talk of change, played like soundtracks to the same romances, only with the pimples removed.
MUSIC REVIEW
Later, Thursday's audience sat up and quieted down for Rimsky-Korsakov's "Antar" Suite, happy to hear the orchestra's virtuosic way with a slight but entertaining piece.
Actually, separation was being acted out on several levels, audience response being only one. It all begins, perhaps, with imperial Russia, which produced these three items. Here, French-speaking upper classes still reached for all things European; lower ones clung increasingly, indeed belligerently, to their Russian voice.
The two Mussorgsky pieces come to us by way of Shostakovich, who resisted the dandifications visited on them by Rimsky-Korsakov and orchestrated both with an honest neutrality. The songs exist in a piano version; "Kovanshchina" is like an estate left intestate, a vast opera full of riches whose intended destinations have been left unclear.
There is a wonderful Mussorgskian moment in its "Dance of the Persian Girls" when stately progress breaks into an up-tempo dance without our really knowing it.  Through a mysterious manipulation of note values, the music continues without a bump, yet we find ourselves running when we had been walking. A comparable inspiration is the magical modulation that brings "Pictures at an Exhibition" to its close.
Yet indissoluble from Mussorgsky's great imagination may be his legacy of fragments. Perhaps incompleteness is as much a part of his music as originality and energy.  (Could it also describe the inspired and sometimes ill-directed passions of the world in which he lived?) If Rimsky-Korsakov's versions of Mussorgsky are deliciously false, Shostakovich's have a grim grayness more descriptive of Russia in the 20th century than in the 19th. I have a feeling that all completers of this music fail, and that in the end we are meant to observe the ruins and imagine their completed state, not experience it first hand.
"The Songs and Dances of Death" celebrate language. They are less songs and dances than dramatic scenes in which music twists and turns to accommodate highly dramatic texts. Dmitri Hvorostovsky's beautifully calculated delivery and flowing sound continued the evening's metaphor of civilization smoothing out a culture's splendid barbarity.
"Antar" simply caves in. It is Russian ingredients subsumed in French sauce. The dancing melodies are delightful. Every orchestral hair is in place. Rimsky, like Ravel, found his own decorative skills too hard to resist. Only Tchaikovsky found the path between Cousin Europe and Mother Russia. He did it by creating a style that is neither one nor the other, yet both.
Mr. Gergiyev conducted this music with tact and self-effacement. The Philharmonic seems to enjoy playing for him.  MUSIC REVIEW
Yet as Mr. Starr shows -- and as a set of Gottschalk recordings just reissued by Vox on CD confirms -- this New Orleans-born musician, perhaps the most renowned American virtuoso of the 19th century, was a man of contrasts and contradictions. He pandered to P. T. Barnum audiences but complained about crude "mass taste." He impressed artistic leaders in the Old World (Chopin predicted that Gottschalk would become the "king of pianists") and political leaders in the New (he played for Abraham Lincoln and the heads of five Latin American governments). He mastered European piano music, but was drawn to Negro, Creole and Caribbean melodies and rhythms.
His piano piece "Bamboula" was so imaginative that it was made part of an examination for pianists at the Paris Conservatory. Two of his sentimental compositions -- "The Dying Poet" and "The Last Hope" -- were so touching that they were adapted as Protestant hymns. Gottschalk was praised by Berlioz ("a consummate pianist") and condemned by the American musical connoisseur George Templeton Strong (one piece made Strong feel like a traveler being gradually awakened in a tropical forest "by ants and other bugs crawling over him").
Mr. Starr, who is a political historian, a former college president and a jazz musician, recognizes that Gottschalk's career encompassed many of the oppositions that still haunt American musical life, between high and low, Old World and New, art and commerce. And although the book has shortcomings as a narrative, its fascinating portrait shows how complicated these issues were and are. Gottschalk was an early example of a uniquely American type, trying to negotiate a path through these thickets, connecting European styles with the cultures of the Americas.
This effort can be heard in the Vox reissue, which contains 40 of Gottschalk's piano works played by Alan Mandel. Mr. Mandel is not always the ideal performer of this music. Whereas Gottschalk's playing was praised for its uncanny clarity and songfulness, Mr. Mandel tends toward heaviness and solemnity. Still, this is a valuable survey of a remarkable career.
MOST IMPORTANT ARE THE EARLY pieces, written soon after Gottschalk left New Orleans to study in France. Following the example of the European Romantics who invoked melodies of neighboring folk cultures, Gottschalk drew on his knowledge of Creole song and Negro dance rhythms for pieces like "Bamboula" and "Le Bananier." Although he softened some of the syncopations and wrapped conventional European harmonies around melodies in alternative scales and modes, the pieces created a sensation in Paris at the time and may later have influenced Scott Joplin and Jelly Roll Morton. The manners of 19th-century pianism surround those echoes of other cultures, incorporating them without completely effacing their exoticism. In South America, Gottschalk created fantastical habaneras and fandangos with a similar effect.
But when he played in the United States and tried to sell himself on local stages, he tended to go in for salon sentimentality, drawing on a more conventional repertory of pianistic techniques. It seems he could not quite find the appropriate national voice to use on native ground.
This lack of assurance may have been a reason for his constant travel to Cuba and South America; he was at his best when suspended between cultures rather than submerged in one, especially when that one was as ill defined and chaotic as that of the United States in the 19th century.
The most startling American piece in these recordings is "L'Union," which was a staple in Gottschalk's concerts during the Civil War. In one passage, with the right hand singing out "Yankee Doodle" while the left intones "Hail, Columbia," Gottschalk anticipated some of Charles Ives's experiments in juxtaposition.
"We have no traditions in America," Gottschalk once wrote in a French publication. The music he composed reinforced this view. And eerily, a century and a half later, that perspective still seems valid.  CLASSICAL VIEW
Like its colleagues in the arts, the Kitchen assuredly struggles for money, but its presence in the midst of all those heavy hitters on Sunday demonstrates a startling ascendancy into the world of acceptance. Revolution thrives on unfulfillment, and that is why the Establishment usually ends up winning: it elects its enemies to membership.
I cannot report on the menu, the wine or the benefit auction upstairs at the Hotel Macklowe, but Robert Wilson was there at the start to present three "Knee Plays" from "Skin, Meat, Bone." In them, Chris O'Connor and Kazuki Takasi (and briefly Omar Rahim) employed two chairs and a handful of props: a pitchfork, a broad-brimmed hat, a shawl, a mask of a baby and the like.
These "plays" are small and stately blackout scenes. Mr. Wilson's use of glacial physical motion (here it favored rigid right-angle patterns) is set off by the sudden spastic gesture: a flourish of the arm or hand, a gaping mouth, frown or grin. Humor and anguish achieve an enviable calm. When there is music at all, it is Alvin Lucier's undulating electronic monotone. Music's function is to rearrange our sense of time. These "Knee Plays" are music more seen than heard.
John Cale sang songs from the piano accompanied by the wired-for-sound Soldier String Quartet. A dirgelike version of "Heartbreak Hotel" was made interesting by the Soldier's menagerie of synthetic squeaks and hoots. Elsewhere, five dancers offered excerpts from Neil Greenberg's "Not-About-AIDS-Dance" in a performance that was ruminative, whimsical and edged with bitterness.  MUSIC REVIEW
While Mr. Jarrett's pellucid tone and transparent voicings were always evident, the improvisations only occasionally provided moments of illumination. More often, the melodies had a doodling, thumb-twiddling quality; passages of harmonic transition petered out instead of arriving at new horizons.
The concert's most concentrated pleasures were the encores. Mr. Jarrett teased the audience, appearing for multiple curtain calls before deciding to play another selection; before the first, he asked the audience for "a quality of silence that's intentional." He played a limpid, tender version of "Danny Boy"; a ballad of his own, draped with lace-curtain chords; an epigrammatic blues, and a version of "Ol' Man River" that juxtaposed hymnlike majesty in the verses with pensive dissonances in the bridges. For this concert, Mr. Jarrett was far better off within song forms than he was with pure freedom.  JAZZ REVIEW
The 37-year-old Mr. Gill, who is from Oklahoma, worked for years to reach his current popularity, and his set was a retrospective. It spanned material from "Let Me Love You Tonight," the 1980 hit he sang with the country-rock band Pure Prairie League, to his latest hit, "Which Bridge to Cross (Which Bridge to Burn)," an aching waltz about trying to decide between "true love" and "new love."
Mr. Gill writes most of his material, and he has been consistent. "Turn Me Loose," from his first solo album in 1984, was as loyal and lovesick as recent songs like "Whenever You Come Around." And "Oklahoma Borderline," from 1984, shows the same joy in honky-tonking as the new "What the Cowgirls Do," in which Mr. Gill's extended solo moved from bluesy twangs to greased-lightning runs.
Mr. Gill's ballads had an unforced earnestness, turning saccharine when they moved from storytelling to pronouncements about love, as in "When Love Finds You." His voice could be bland on the uptempo songs, but his guitar solos, supported by his meticulous and swinging band, showed that honky-tonk doesn't need raunch.
Patty Loveless opened the concert, and joined Mr. Gill for an encore. She has a big, throbbing, classic country voice, melancholy in ballads and feisty in uptempo tunes. On recent albums she has chosen strong material, songs about loss, obsession and watching betrayers get betrayed. But she conveys more heartfelt emotion in the studio than she did onstage at the Paramount.
POP REVIEW
A longstanding pop archetype that until recently seemed unshakable was the image of the Latin lover as a suave crooner pouring out his heart in smooth, semioperatic declarations of passion. His seductive appeal derived from a mixture of matinee-idol elegance and stylized vulnerability.
But as Jon Secada, the Cuban-American pop star who sold out three shows at Radio City Music Hall over the weekend, has shown, that image is as subject to change as everything else in pop. Mr. Secada is no crooner. Singing in a big, braying voice that suggests an operatic Billy Joel, he declares his feelings with a punchy urgency that is just this side of strident.
In his performance on Friday, Mr. Secada augmented the emotive body language of the traditional Latin crooner with overt macho posturing. Although he arrived on the stage wearing an elegant double-breasted suit, he eventually stripped down to a tank top to show off his well-toned body. Punching his fist in the air or raising his arms triumphantly, he played the role of pop star like an excitable prizefighter.
Mr. Secada's singing and songwriting blend a traditional Latin-American pop melodiousness with 1970's pop-soul styles. During his performance, he lauded Marvin Gaye and Philip Bailey (of Earth, Wind and Fire) as influences. But while he more than matched them in vocal stamina, he displayed none of their rhythmic subtlety and nuanced expressiveness. Everything was declaimed with the same blunt forcefulness.
Mr. Secada has a falsetto of unusual strength and staying power. But this upper-register voice with which he serenaded a female fan picked from the audience revealed little textural coloration or sweetness. It was a sharp, hard whine.
Applied to impassioned pop ballads like "Just Another Day" and "Mental Picture," Mr. Secada's singing carries a genuine emotional clout. But the acoustics were so muddied, with the percussion and background singers burying the keyboards and guitars, that even here, the music lacked focus.  STEPHEN HOLDEN  IN PERFORMANCE
Many institutions are planning little-needed explorations of the works of Beethoven. Alfred Brendel is to perform the complete piano concertos with the New York Philharmonic. Carnegie Hall's "Focus on Beethoven" includes a series of chamber recitals and a complete survey of the piano sonatas by Maurizio Pollini. Even the 92d Street Y's Schubertiade is preoccupied with Beethoven.
A "new initiative" at the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, a weeklong Beethoven festival that includes a seminar on "Beethoven as Businessman," seems to hold a key: Beethoven is a businessman, a safe marketing agent. His omnipresence heralds a season of consolidation rather than enterprise. Consolidation is not intrinsically a problem; the question is what is being consolidated.
Now that Mr. Masur has succeeded in remaking the sound, ensemble and musical style of the Philharmonic, for example, can he develop a larger perspective and become a major artistic leader? Can the Philharmonic begin to match the coherence and imagination displayed by the Cleveland Orchestra under Christoph von Dohnanyi? The prospective programs do not advance the cause, with a tribute to Falla, a "composer week" drawing attention to Lukas Foss, and a procession of works that emphasize Mr. Masur's strengths, including Bach's B-minor Mass and compositions by Mendelssohn and Grieg.
Beyond a choral workshop on Verdi's Requiem, included in a tribute to Robert Shaw, Carnegie Hall has announced just one major seminar on the scale of previous seasons : a two-day examination of, yes, Beethoven. It will be a privilege to hear Richard Goode, Radu Lupu and Frederica von Stade in recital, but there is not much to recommend next season over this one.
At Lincoln Center, the as yet unannounced schedule of the new summer festival in 1996 casts a shadow backward on the entire season. If it succeeds, it will be the center's defining artistic and financial enterprise; if not, a fundamental rethinking of the center's mission will probably follow.
James Levine's 25th season at the artistic helm of the Metropolitan Opera is to be celebrated with an end-of-season gala. But the real question at the Met is where the general manager, Joseph Volpe, is heading. Valery Gergiyev, not Mr. Levine, will conduct a new production of Tchaikovsky's "Queen of Spades," and David Robertson, not Mr. Levine, will lead the company's first production of Janacek's "Makropulos Case." Excellent casts are promised (as in a new production of Mozart's "Cosi Fan Tutte") along with questionable choices. But the Met is risking little overall, offering traditional stagings with recognizable names, aided by the new Met Titles.
In the first season of Michael Barrett's artistic administration at the 92d Street Y, his influence will be only partly felt. There seems to be a renewed emphasis on the voice: Hermann Prey sings songs of Carl Loewe; Lauren Flanigan appears in recital; Dawn Upshaw explores the connection between music and spirituality. Luciano Berio's complete "Sequenzas" make for an important concert, and the New York Chamber Orchestra continues in uneasy residency. But the Y's artistic future remains in the balance.
The New York City Opera is financially strapped, and Christopher Keene's leadership is regularly challenged by influential board members, but the coming season stands out with three works of vastly different character: Jost Meier's "Dreyfus Affair," Toshiro Mayuzumi's "Temple of the Golden Pavilion" and Hindemith's "Mathis der Maler." If the company can raise the level of its standard-repertory casts, and if Jonathan Miller's new production of Richard Strauss's "Rosenkavalier" makes a mark, the company may be on its way toward defining its role.
The Brooklyn Academy of Music also has advantages; it has been held up as a model for other institutions because of its younger, hipper audiences, but it has a more enviable asset: it is run by a true impresario, Harvey Lichtenstein. Mr. Lichtenstein's judgments, which came to maturity with the Downtown avant-garde, are open to objections, but they have an important place in the city's culture. The programs for next season, unannounced at press time, will probably maintain a balance between tradition and enterprise.
So attractive prospects and exceptions exist. But behind many attempts at consolidation lurks a hidden anxiety, the result of both internal doubts about an institution's mission and a barrage of external pressures from the cultural marketplace. Although things appear stable, problems persist that even Beethoven cannot fix.  CLASSICAL VIEW
The typical Jobim song combines a wistful romanticism with a bossa nova beat to evoke the beauty of the world and at the same moment its evanescence. Mixing tricky, circular, lightly tripping melodies with a sly samba pulse, his compositions are impressionistic in their depiction of a landscape where the moods and rhythms of a lush natural world are inseparable from erotic longing.
What distinguishes the love songs of Jobim and his followers from generic British-American romantic ballads is their fluency. They bubble along like sparkling streams, taking unexpected little twists and turns, and fade away without making grand emotional statements. What redeems them from bathos is their continuous rhythmic buoyancy. Yearning and joy are portrayed as virtually synonymous.
For an all-star event attended by the President of Brazil, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, the show was remarkably intimate and small scale. Except for a big band finale, the performances rarely featured more than four musicians. Mr. Nascimento and Mr. Veloso, musical giants who have carried Jobim's eclecticism in different and more overtly poetic directions, each sang simple quiet tributes. Mr. Gilberto, who remains Jobim's definitive interpreter, sang four classics -- "Desafinado," "One Note Samba," "No More Blues" and "Quiet Nights of Quiet Stars" -- in a husky whisper, hunched over his guitar. He was matched in intensity by Miss Costa's quietly fiery versions of "Dindi" and "A Felicidade."
Some of the evening's loveliest music featured the Jobim Morelenbaum Quartet, a pop-jazz chamber ensemble that has the composer's son Paulo, his grandson Daniel and Paula and Jacques Morelenbaum.
The concert also had its awkward moments. The performance of Jobim's most famous song, "The Girl From Ipanema" was nothing less than a fiasco. Astrud and Joao Gilberto, who shared the lead vocals, missed their entrances. Michael Brecker, playing Stan Getz's part, contributed a limp solo that died prematurely, and Dave Grusin's piano and Mr. Gilberto's guitar were excruciatingly out of tune.
Mr. Franks's low-key rendition of his song "Antonio's Song/The Rainbow," which is dedicated to Jobim, was far from the evening's high point, but its lyric captured the spirit of Jobim's music as well as anything that was said:
And let the music flow
Like Light into the Rainbow
We know the Dance, we have
We still have the chance
To break these chains and flow
Like Light into the Rainbow.
POP REVIEW
This curious quality of playing held true through both Wednesday's and Thursday's programs; and hearing the orchestra so seldom in concert, I cannot really explain it. Nielsen's Suite in A minor introduced the San Francisco's resonant lower strings. The sound is rich and relaxed; it made the Praeludium dance graciously and later helped us forget the thinness of young Nielsen's inflated, though heartfelt, passions.
But in Nielsen as in Sibelius and as well in Strauss's "Also Sprach Zarathustra" after intermission, one had the impression of strong musicians who for one reason or another were having a hard time playing together. Detail in the Sixth was hidden in fog banks of approximation, as if the back-desk violinists really had no idea what their conductor was doing and proceeded as if none was before them. Everyone landed on the right spot at the right time, but even strongly accented entrances were not always arrived at precisely. Is this kind of blowziness, which by the way has an amiability of its own, an active interpretive style? I don't know.
Thursday's familiar repertory, with its widely shared stylistic gestures, muted such problems, but they never really went away. The San Franciscans were good accompanists in the Beethoven Fourth Piano Concerto, and the scaling back of string parts to near chamber proportions fit not only the music but also Peter Serkin's elegant and highly precise musicality in the solo parts. How interesting it is to hear Beethoven's brass and winds, usually half hidden in big-orchestra sound, speak out so clearly.
The big Schubert C-major Symphony at the end offered admirable intentions, hazily realized. This is music that lives and dies by the execution of the dotted rhythm, and yet no one could really decide just how it should be played. Horn players stretched the long note, rushing and slurring the short one. String players veered between crisp, elastic correctness and galumphing approximations. Hearing balanced definition in the wind sections (peopled evidently by good players) was a constant effort. It will be interesting to hear what the San Francisco's new music director, Michael Tilson Thomas, makes of this orchestra.  MUSIC REVIEW
It was hard to know what to admire more in the concert by Parnassus, a 20th-century instrumental group, on Wednesday evening: the imaginative text settings in Paul Hindemith's "Serenaden" and Alba Potes's "Canciones Nocturnas" or the evocations of imaginary texts in Oliver Knussen's "Songs Without Voices" and Stephen Hartke's "Wulfstan at the Millennium," the latter in its New York premiere.
Actually, Mr. Knussen conceived some of his songs with poems in mind but chose not to share them with listeners. Mr. Hartke, on the other hand, fabricated an entire quasi-liturgical progression of wordless antiphons, motets and the like.
Mr. Hartke's work, whose title refers to an early polyphonist, gives an interesting twist to the neo-medievalism now rampant, juxtaposing the ancient and the modern with nary a nod to any intervening era. Jazzy marimba licks elbow aside two-part counterpoint on the piano, and the progression, though sometimes inscrutable, drew a listener inexorably along.
Ms. Potes's atonal ditties, to texts by Jorge Guillen, limn nocturnal shadows exquisitely and are the very soul of brevity.
Susan Narucki sang the Hindemith and Potes works with full, generally secure and mostly attractive tone. The instrumental forces, conducted in the larger works by Anthony Korf, were sometimes excellent and always adequate, though string unisons tended to lose focus.  JAMES R. OESTREICH  IN PERFORMANCE
The concert, which began with songs from her newest album, "Feels Like Home" (Elektra), was a journey that methodically wended its way back in time. The final number, Anna McGarrigle's wrenching folk ballad "Heart Like a Wheel," was the title song of Ms. Ronstadt's first million-selling album, in 1974.
While the concert had its share of up-tempo numbers -- rousing version of Martha and the Vandellas' "Heat Wave" was especially exhilarating -- the bulk of the evening was devoted to ballads that showed off the undiminished beauty of Ms. Ronstadt's voice. The essential personality of that voice has changed little in 20 years. A girlish perkiness is emotionally deepened by a honeyed sob and fortified with a belting upper register that has grown pronouncedly more powerful in recent years. Ms. Ronstadt's country-folk phrasing and intonation are flexible and dynamic enough to accommodate soul and medium-hard rock songs so long as the material has a strong melodic thrust.
An early high point in the program was an ethereal five-voice arrangement of Neil Young's "After the Gold Rush" that featured the eerie vibrations of the glass armonica, an esoteric instrument that adds a textural glow to several numbers on Ms. Ronstadt's newest album. Three 1960's pop-soul ballads -- "Oh No, Not My Baby," "Anyone Who Had a Heart" and "Ooh Baby Baby" -- showed Ms. Ronstadt's special knack for blending country and soul inflections into an all-American pop style that is scrupulously mindful of its sources.
A 20-minute segment was devoted to songs by Jimmy Webb, whose lovelorn ballads, steeped in romantic Hollywood angst, blend many of the same stylistic inflections ingrained in Ms. Ronstadt's singing. Performed in succession, "The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress," "Shattered," "Adios" and "I Keep It Hid" showed Ms. Ronstadt and Mr. Webb to be virtual soul mates in the way they bring a late-19th-century romantic melancholy to a rock-and-roll ethos.
"They're all sad songs," Ms. Ronstadt said, introducing the segment. "But when I sing them, I begin to feel happy. They cheer me right up."  POP REVIEW
This 1916 opera, in fact, may be full of modernist self-consciousness -- a Composer who sings a paean to "holy music" as backstage shenanigans undercut his piety; styles that leap from Wagner to Johann Strauss Jr.; an opera within an opera that is a mixture of two different operas -- but Mr. Sawallisch treated the work as a missive from an less ironic era. Hugo von Hofmannsthal's libretto might have pointed to the breaking down of forms and manners, but Mr. Sawallisch emphasized continuities rather than disjunctions, making the work seem conservative rather than revolutionary.
This is partly because "Ariadne" was not staged, so despite the projected supertitles, its playful plot, in which two troupes of actors and singers are asked to perform two works simultaneously for a rich Viennese patron, was less prominent. During the Prologue, "Ariadne" even seemed a strange choice of repertory for a concert performance, since so much depends on staging and so much of the language is recitative and dialogue. There were still dramatic highlights, most notably, Eike Wilm Schulte as the Music Teacher, whose warm, glowing baritone is winning plaudits in Europe and should be heard more in New York. In the speaking role of the Majordomo, Werner Klemperer was properly stentorian and fluently Germanic. Ann Murray was more stringent and edgy than I have heard her of late, but was an appealing Composer.
In the Opera -- the opera's second half -- the lack of staging became irrelevant. Gabriela Benackova and Gosta Winbergh had to cancel their appearances as Ariadne and Bacchus because of illness, but much of the casting was strong. Mechthild Gessendorf was genuinely moving as Ariadne, sometimes surging unnecessarily at top notes, but more often creating long lyrical lines that suggested the dreamy confusion of her character. Paul Frey began handsomely as Bacchus, but later sounded strained and ill at ease. Jane Giering-De Haan executed her staggeringly difficult central aria with grace, even if her small-scale coloratura didn't often create a sense of effortlessness. The ensembles of Nymphs (Joyce Guyer, Mary Ann McCormick and Korliss Uecker) and commedia clowns (Sebastian Holecek, Julian Rodescu, Philip Creech and Richard Clement) were delightful.
In fact, stripped of stage business and guided by Mr. Sawallisch's obvious love for this music, the overlapping and interacting musical genres became expressions of a single temperament. The mythic lovers, the clowns, the characters' misrecognitions and misplaced pieties, all found common ground in a sense of gemutlichkeit. The effect was not of nostalgia, but its reverse. A lost world was not longed for; instead, the feeling of loss was deliciously savored. Mr. Sawallisch unveiled the coziness of Strauss.
OPERA REVIEW
Yet even when the recording goes straight to the concert stage, when it eavesdrops on a public event, the eerie chill of CD stillness never quite goes away. The sound of music is there, but something is missing, as if at a duet program one musician had not shown up. Listening is a transitive act. At home, the CD plays but does not hear us. It makes a difference.
Concert silence is of human manufacture, our part in a duet between stage and auditorium. The musicians speak to us. We answer: quiet when engaged, coughing and foot-shuffling when bored. When a musician does not give us everything we expect to hear, we supply the missing elements in our minds. The audience is passive in that it does not play the notes or sing the intervals, but it is active in the wall of positive, often corrective, energy it sends toward the stage.
It's pretty much the same when, in privacy, we play our own instruments. Part of us performs; part of us listens. The listener in us returns energy to the performer in us: exhorting, appreciating, charitably editing out misdemeanors. Music played feeds music heard. Music heard feeds music played. Performance is not a linear but a circular transaction.
Italo Calvino described the musical theater as a great ear. This communal organ of the senses "holds all vibrations and notes within itself, an ear listening to itself, at once ear and shell held to ear." Calvino's theater is a place where "all possible vision is contained and directed, as though within a single eye looking at itself, seeing itself mirrored in the iris of its own pupil."
CHARLES ROSEN'S NEW BOOK, "The Romantic Generation," introduces itself with examples of music that audiences hear even when it is not being played. One is at the end of Beethoven's C-minor Piano Sonata (Op. 111): a B-flat-to-A-natural resolution describing tension and release. By the time the A natural actually arrives, the resonating B flat has long since evaporated from the vibrating piano strings. But we want to hear it, and so our imaginations, aided by surrounding harmonic events, keep it alive. We in our small way have become composers, too.
The mimed gestures in Toshiro Mayu zumi's "Metamusic," at a Continuum concert not long ago, looked like a joke, but they may not be. Silent conductorial arm-waving has always guided musicians, for example, but it may also provide another way for audiences to hear. Maybe, as Mr. Rosen suggests, undiscernible but essential details happening in the midst of big-orchestra sound are being confirmed by the eye alone, just as Beethoven's long-dead B flat is a construction of faith created in the memory.
I have always been puzzled by arguments over acoustics among my colleagues: whether one hears better in Row L of Carnegie Hall than in Row W. This seems a passive way of listening. Bad halls, of course, are bad halls, and Carnegie is one of quality. True, after a point, deadness deadens music; piano recitals heard from behind closed doors are to be avoided. And when Royal Albert Hall in London or Yankee Stadium treats us to one sound experienced many times, the line must be drawn. But in cases less extreme, we ourselves are more accountable for the sounds we hear than we realize.
And eyes do often listen for us. The unforgiving aural image of Avery Fisher Hall does not seem to go away, even though the recent acoustical renovations, fiercely ugly as they are, have helped enormously. That bright, brash, jangling sensation remains. How much this feeling of hardness has to do with Fisher's hot, reflective color scheme is an interesting speculation. Would a soothing paint job change the way we hear? Seeing, at any rate, is the most domineering of our five senses. We trust vision reflexively.
Listeners as creators have their biggest moment in John Cage's famous "4' 33"," where pianists do nothing and audience members listen to one another. Less extreme but powerfully calculated is the rock concert's control of audience energy: the precurtain drones that build undercurrents of anticipation, the shouted exhortations from audience "soloists" wholly invited by musicians in progress. Live rock is social music; recordings are a solace for the lonely but paradoxically bear a loneliness of their own. They talk to us; we cannot talk to them.  CLASSICAL VIEW
Yet Mascagni's lyrical writing is graceful and appealing. The choruses work well, though this was hard to ascertain from the Pro Arte Chorale's vague and tentative ensemble on Sunday. Rachel Sparer was the sturdy Matilda, Joseph Wolverton's Silvano offered a clean and delicate if somewhat accident-prone tenor. Bojan Knezevic and Lorraine DiSimone sang Renzo and Rosa. The Czech players come naturally by their nice string sound, but this is not always a reliable or particularly subtle orchestra. Peter Tiboris conducted it diligently. Mozart's C-minor Mass began the afternoon.
With its simple cast and uncomplicated musical demands, "Silvano" is a ripe property for smaller opera houses. Here in two shorts acts is fresh, do-able, audience-friendly repertory. BERNARD HOLLAND
Good time -- the consistent awareness of a piece's beat -- is extremely rare among younger musicians, but this rhythm section, which has been working together fairly regularly, had it. They gave the band an airtight feel. Mr. Reed is astonishingly secure rhythmically, never wavering even when executing difficult polyrhythmic passages; he always returned to the basic pulse and made it swing.
The band played a set's worth of rarely performed compositions by Thelonious Monk, including "Bright Mississippi," "Brake's Sake" and "Wee See," arranged with varied instrumental combinations. "Bright Mississippi" featured just bass and trombone, while "Wee See" moved from a quartet performance with Mr. Anderson on sopranino saxophone to a duet by Mr. Wolfe and Mr. Anderson, and back. One piece had the horns playing the melody, then giving way to solos by members of the rhythm section. These are all simple arranging tricks, but they took the band out of jazz's deadly routine, where every band member solos on every tune.
It was all authoritative and mature, and its power suggested that these promising musicians have come into their own.  JAZZ REVIEW
The musicians' plain-spoken style seemed, if anything, to contrast with the ornate grandeur of the furniture on display, although the faltering "Grandfather's Clock" of which Ms. Morris sang might well have been the Herter example, now lacking its innards. The point, of course, was that these songs -- except, perhaps, for those of a mildly subversive bent, like "100 Years Hence" -- would have been heard in the patrician parlors graced by the furniture.
Ms. Morris, though fighting dryness in her voice at times, easily gave the lie to "I Cannot Sing the Old Songs." She achieved transcendent moments in the haunting classic "Tenting on the Old Campground" and displayed her irrepressible humor in "The Ivy Green."
Mr. Bolcom's remarkable musicianship was put to a greater test than usual by a particularly clangorous Baldwin piano but emerged triumphant in finely gauged, vividly imagined collaborations. And his commentary was typically informative and entertaining. JAMES R. OESTREICH
With age, the singer Abbey Lincoln, who is performing through Sunday night and celebrating the release of her new record, "A Turtle's Dream" (Verve), is moving toward greatness. She is paring away affectation, working with the limitations of her instrument, using them to make the personality they imply become emotionally resonant.
At her first set on Thursday night, Ms. Lincoln stuck mostly to her own material, which is often plain-spoken and autobiographical, often about being alone. Everything she did added up to a grand whole: the bluntness she used when reading melodies, the subtle changes of her vocal textures, and her use of intonation, which sometimes let her notes fall through the cracks of the piano,  lacing her sound with vinegar. At times, her rhythmic sense was staggering, the  way she bounced phrases around the time, or repeated rhythmic figures, and how she always knew where to cut off a phrase to make it swing.
The finest moment of the set was "The Nearness of You," which she sang as an  encore. Her own songs are sometimes diffuse, without a center. But within the confines of this standard, Ms. Lincoln brought all the weight of her experience  to the words, using a dusty voice full of bitterness, defiance and understanding. And her band restrained itself enough to let the full power of her voice show. Like almost no one else in jazz, she sings a lyric as if it means something to her, as if it were more than a vehicle for improvisation. For her, the perfect note, gilded by the right inflection, can take a song beyond the realm of performance, into something much more profound.
The saxophonist Charles Lloyd closed the show with a set of Coltrane-inspired pieces. The best brought some of his idiom back to life but weren't always convincing.
PETER WATROUS
IN PERFORMANCE
The fourth and final concert in the Music of the Americas series, on Thursday evening, offered a refreshing departure from concert routine. Richard S. Weinert, the president of Chamber Music International, which organized the programs, explained that the germ of the series, was a performance a few years ago by Rachel Rosales, a Mexican soprano, of "Solamenta Sola," a song cycle by her compatriot Samuel Zyman.
Ms. Rosales performed the work again here, along with cycles by Manuel Ponce and Rodolfo Halffter and songs by Schubert, Schumann and Brahms. But her collaborator, Blanca Uribe, a Colombian and a pianist of stature in her own right, was, remarkably, treated as such.
Oh, occasionally an accompanist will step forward to fill out a vocal recital with a fluffy solo number. But Ms. Uribe played Beethoven's imposing Opus 110 Sonata along with the "Danzas Argentinas" of Alberto Ginastera and "Estilos" by her compatriot, Jesus Pinzon.
Ms. Uribe proved an excellent solo performer, balancing power with finesse, piquant detail with a grasp of the longer argument. She was equally impressive in the song cyles, which, as Ms. Rosales aptly said, consist largely of miniature tone poems of an almost orchestral nature.
Ms. Rosales still had plenty to do in this pairing of mini-recitals. She sounded thoroughly at home, of course, in the Mexican material, less so in Schubert and Schumann. Yet she made an eloquent statement of Brahms's "Von ewiger Liebe."  JAMES R. OESTREICH  IN PERFORMANCE
Mr. Denver's concert at Radio City Music Hall on Saturday night to benefit the Wildlife Conservation Society was a typically smooth exercise in ceremonial grace. Except for having put on a few pounds, Mr. Denver seemed remarkably unchanged from 20 years ago when he was one of the country's two or three best-selling pop singers. What has changed drastically is the pop climate. Mr. Denver's pastoral reveries have lost their footing in a pop mainstream increasingly obsessed with paranoia and complaint. Although Mr. Denver can be heard on country radio stations, as he pointed out on Saturday his music is really more western than country.
That music is well made, and on Saturday it was ringingly performed. Mr. Denver's voice, with its built-in twang and rapid vibrato, has lost none of its oratorical clout. Singing with an almost mechanistic precision and with perfect pitch and enunciation. he projected his voice as though it were meant to bounce off mountainsides and resound to the heavens.
The old hits -- "Rocky Mountain High," "Back Home Again," "Take Me Home, Country Roads," "Poems, Prayers and Promises" and "Sunshine on My Shoulders" sounded sturdy. So did lesser-known later songs like "Eagles and Horses" and "For You," although their messages were more abstract and spiritual. It is the material for an all-American song book.
POP REVIEW
Americans who have seen these ballets with various companies since 1916 (especially after Fokine left the Soviet Union in 1918 and settled in New York) might wonder why such coals should be carried to the Met.
The novelty of the program is twofold. It is, to begin with, the first such program from a Russian troupe. Although "Chopiniana," renamed "Les Sylphides" by Diaghilev in Paris in 1909, has regularly been performed by the Kirov, the other two works were never seen in Russia in Fokine's original versions.
The second point lies in production values and stagings that differ from those in the usual revivals. Isabelle Fokine, Fokine's American granddaughter, and Andris Liepa have based their stagings on such archival materials as Fokine's rehearsal films and notes. Whether they are more valid than Western productions will be part of the usual debate over authenticity.
The quick tally is that "The Firebird" is a blazing success while the two other productions leave something to be desired. "Chopiniana," in the version that Mikhail Baryshnikov staged at American Ballet Theater, may be a Kirov staple, but it was danced here to a dirgelike tempo that would put even an insomniac to sleep. "Scheherazade," to Rimsky-Korsakov's music, was enhanced by Farouk Ruzimatov's free-form pantherine performance as the Golden Slave made famous by Nijinsky. The decor, based on Leon Bakst's designs, had the blues and greens of exotic legend. There is also an uncredited front curtain based on a design by Valentin Serov. Somewhat harsher than the original, it shows harem women looking at a king's hunting party.
The choreography, which included a duet interpolated later by Fokine, was nonetheless on the static side, suggesting that it had been reconstructed from pictures rather than a performing tradition.
Not so "The Firebird," which was danced to the full 1910 Stravinsky ballet score rather than the shorter suite used at the New York City Ballet. Altynai Asylmuratova was dazzling in the title role, and Mr. Liepa's Prince Ivan looked aptly enchanted as her partner. But just as dazzling was the decor, which tries to reproduce the original backdrop by Aleksandr Golovine rather than the better-known 1926 set by Natalia Goncharova.
Although uncredited, Anna and Anatoli Nezhny, two Russian set designers, have reproduced the spirit of the kingdom of Kostchei, the evil wizard. He has taken the usual princesses captive. But here for the first time one sees how he has turned noble knights into stone. The battle scene at stage right shows them petrified within a bas-relief.
The choreography hews close to versions performed in the West, especially those based on the 1954 Royal Ballet staging in which Tamara Karsavina, the original Firebird, taught her role to Margot Fonteyn.
Nonetheless, Ms. Asylmuratova, diamond sharp and swift in her classical dancing, radiates a special untamed beauty: a performance not to be missed. Roman Skripkin, as the wizard, and his monsters had a surprisingly welcome vitality, and Mr. Liepa was fiercely dramatic when he held the wizard's soul (an egg) in his hands before crushing it. Yekaterina Katkovskaya made a glamorous princess. Both she and Ivan wear crosses around their necks, which their counterparts in the West do not. To turn this "Firebird" into a Christian allegory, as Ms. Fokine has suggested in interviews, seems absurd. The final decor may show Golovine's onion-domed churches, but they do not symbolize redemption as a similar image does in Rimsky-Korsakov's "Invisible City of Kitezh."
Prince Peter Lieven, who was close to Diaghilev's circle, was more to the point in discussing the composite plot of "Firebird." This patchwork of fairy tales, he wrote in his memoirs, "was not convincing for a Russian: It was as if Alice of 'Alice in Wonderland' were partnered by Falstaff in a Scotch jig."
Diaghilev had no qualms about cutting up Rimsky-Korsakov's symphonic suite for "Scheherazade" and attaching a new plot to the music. Nowadays, this Arabian Night's tale of a jealous Shah who finds Zobeide, his harem favorite, in the arms of her lover and orders a mass slaughter, looks like kitsch. It is in fact rarely performed and was seen in New York in the last 17 years only with the Festival Ballet and Dance Theater of Harlem.
The Kirov does not seem at home in Fokine's expressive style. Mr. Ruzimatov gives a much needed spark by inserting some pure virtuosity, counter to Fokine's principles. Nonetheless, his first feline pounce on stage was all it should be, and Yuliya Makhalina's Zobeide was suitably haughty. Good mime came from Gennadi Babanin as the Shah.
"Chopiniana" was led by Zhanna Ayupova, Viktor Baranov, Irina Sitnikova and Alla Dmitriyeva.
BALLET REVIEW
So you approach it prepared for the worst, only to discover that there are good things in this 1989 Lyons Opera production, by the company's house team of Louis Erlo, director, and Kent Nagano, conductor (PC 95-081, two laser-disk sides; a CD version by the same forces is available on Virgin Classics). The performers make reasonably good musical sense of the score, in part because the production in fact allows them to take the piece at least a bit -- dare one say it? -- seriously.
The Lyons "Love" certainly represents a significant advance, pretty much across the board, over the previous video "Love," the 1982 Glyndebourne production designed by Maurice Sendak and directed by Frank Corsaro (currently unavailable). But then, that represents a humble standard of comparison.
The jacket for the Glyndebourne "Love" was more helpfully blurbed. It proclaimed the production "nothing short of a sizzling visual extravaganza . . . alive with acrobats, jugglers, body-builders, monsters, outrageous inflatable figures, colossal puppets and special animated sequences, creating a farcical, carnival atmosphere" -- in sum, "an elaborate and extravagant variety show unlike anything ever seen before on the operatic stage."
Which may be fine for sizzling-extravaganza fans. It is not so fine for those of us who think there is actually something going on in this opera, and may have set our sights on an opera rather than a variety show.
In fairness, "Love" is a highly stylized piece that seems to invite extravagant production high jinks. The opera can even be said to include a variety show -- in Act II, when the jester Truffaldino produces a series of entertainments to try to get the King's ailing son to laugh, as a last-ditch treatment for his officially diagnosed "incurable hypochondria."
But these are specific entertainments for a specific purpose. Wherever you look at the text, "Love" is extremely, and humanly, specific. Stylized doesn't mean nonhuman. When the Prince, finally brought to laughter via a giant pratfall by the sorceress Fata Morgana, is doomed by the sorceress to a fantastic quest for three oranges, the plot line may be stock comic, but the musical realization is grandly, even extravagantly, human; it is the very intensity of the Prince's sudden infatuation that makes it funny.
Similarly, if it is amusing that the oranges are guarded by a giant cook who is reputed to kill intruders with her giant ladle, the Cook herself -- written for a bass -- is much funnier played straight by the veteran Jules Bastin in the Lyons production than incarnated as a giant puppet in the Glyndebourne production. It is, of course, silly that the Cook is disarmed by the simple ribbon with which the magician Tchelio has equipped Truffaldino, who has accompanied the Prince, but it is something much more wonderful than merely silly when Mr. Bastin, in his giant cook's getup, is really consumed with longing for the ribbon.
No great insight is needed to perceive the artifice of the story. It is layers deep. "Love," written in 1919 on commission from the Chicago Opera, is based on a 1761 play by Carlo Gozzi that itself played consciously with the stock characters and situations of the old commedia dell'arte. A century and a half later, Gozzi was all the rage with the Russian theatrical avant-garde centered around Vsevolod Meyerhold.
Yet the image of "Love" as a casually tossed-off piece of fluff contradicts not only Prokofiev's considerable effort of composition and midwifery (the opera was not performed until 1921, and during rehearsals for the premiere the composer seems to have made a considerable nuisance of himself) but also the internal evidence of the score. As suggested, while the music is abundantly comic, it is never stock.
And even more obviously, the musical demands of this compact opera (its prologue and four acts, 11 scenes in all, last only an hour and three-quarters) are extreme, although in time-honored comic-opera tradition they are often blurred in performance. Major demands are made on the large cast, including substantial legit singing.
On the male side, the score calls for high-quality tenors for both the Prince and Truffaldino, a major baritone for the prime minister, Leandre, basses for the King and Tchelio and an alleged bass (one who socks out E's and F's) for Farfarello. There are fewer extended female roles, but Fata Morgana calls for a dramatic soprano, and she has some of the score's most memorable music. (Her name, in fact, elicited some haunting music.)
Indeed, all of the libretto's magical elements summoned wonderful music from Prokofiev. Perhaps the most puzzling aspect of the Glyndebourne production is its complete lack of interest, verging on outright contempt, in this whole dimension of the piece.
The most blatant instance: At the opening of Act III, after the Prince and Truffaldino have set off on their quest, Tchelio summons the demon Farfarello, who has propelled them on their way. Tchelio calls Farfarello's name 21 times, and there is obviously an element of operatic parody here. Practically speaking, the endless repetitions are also admittedly not an easy thing for the performer to play.
But the Glyndebourne production sidesteps the problem entirely, intercutting a frazzled-looking stage manager who looks about haplessly, as if the singer had missed his cue. Get it? Out the window goes any concern for Prokofiev's musical dramatization of the difficulty of Tchelio's summons, having to do with his need for the demon, and the demon's remoteness and independent-mindedness.
GLYNDEBOURNE'S TCHElio is costumed as a sort of scoutmaster, with a stuffed owl planted on his hat; Fata Morgana looks like a wicked stepsister from "Cinderella." In a time as consumingly open to the lures of the supernatural as this, the era of the Psychic Friends' Hotline, you would think that Prokofiev's richly imagined invocations of the otherworldly would be an attraction rather than an embarrassment. But then, the Glyndebourne production seems to have had no grander ambition for the opera than cuteness.
The Lyons production is less fancy but consistently more interested in the text. It has a distinct visual look, tending to costumes in white and black, but with generous infusions of color. The red-jacketed cohorts of marching men make a zestful visual image for the great March. The sets are basically formed from movable massive white geometric forms, but as with the costumes, they are deployed with considerable variety and attention to detail, so they generally seem to relate to the specific needs of scenes rather than enforcing some grand concept.
The production creates for itself a style that legitimately serves the opera. And the cast, too, seems to have found a legitimate style for the piece, one that makes the vocal writing seem like natural expression rather than Expressionistic ranting. The Prince's decision to defy his worried father and set off in search of the oranges becomes a genuinely touching moment, as it should be. The relationship between concerned parent and whiny, indulgent child is one of the most basic levels on which "Love" has a chance to work. Is there really anyone who can't identify with both -- even the Prince at his whiniest and most indulgent?
The style of the Lyons production is distinctly French, which is fine since "Love" is at least in part a French opera. Elements of the piece that are unmistakably Russian, in either traditional or avant-garde (circa 1919) ways, are left for a comparably ambitious Russian production; at least this one has some coherent identity.
The cast is more than respectable. The tenors, Georges Gautier (Truffaldino) and Jean-Luc Viala (the Prince), are as good as I have heard in "Love." The baritones Vincent Le Texier (Leandre) and Didier Henry (doubling Farfarello and the courtier Pantaloon) are first-rate. Michele Lagrange does remarkably well with much of Fata Morgana's writing but is occasionally overwhelmed. The veteran baritone Gabriel Bacquier lends his dignified presence to the King. The performance is conducted with vigor and sense by Mr. Nagano.
So this production has much going for it. It doesn't go far enough, and it doesn't seem likely to persuade nonbelievers. But by pursuing some of the right directions, it has at least brought us a good step closer to this special opera than we were.  VIDEO VIEW Kenneth Furie is a former music editor of High Fidelity magazine.
Mr. Coleman opened his first set with "Dearly Beloved," and at the end of the piece he started moving the first phrase of the melody from key to key. The band, improvising, followed him. When Alvin Queen, the drummer, was soloing, Mr. Maburn and Mr. Nasser played a riff; Mr. Maburn changed key on Mr. Nasser, who smiled and followed. On the last melody of another tune, Mr. Coleman played in a different key from the band, giving the reading a dissonance.
At times the band's sense of play overwhelmed the music. As astounding as the improvisations could be in their freedom and manipulation of form, what was often missing was the simplicity needed to give a performance drama. The music was all noisy foreground, played by four improvisers working hard to load the music with everything they knew. Silence didn't stand a chance. If music is meant to be only excitement and virtuosity, Mr. Coleman was a master on Tuesday night. He is at the Village Vanguard through tomorrow.  JAZZ REVIEW
On the revolving stage of this theater in the round, the band managed to transcend nostalgia, performing a 90-minute mix of hits like "You Really Got Me" and "Lola" and lesser-known songs with enthusiasm and finesse. Mr. Davies opened the concert alone with an acoustic guitar, warming up his voice on some of his wittiest sendups of normalcy and conformity: "Autumn Almanac," "A Well-Respected Man," "Dedicated Follower of Fashion" and "Sunny Afternoon." Then he introduced the band, which included his younger brother and sometime sparring partner, Dave, an unsung guitar hero of the British Invasion, as he proved with a long and winding blues-rock solo during "20th-Century Man."
In many of the pop ballads he wrote during the late 60's and early 70's, Mr. Davies put himself in the shoes of old codgers, drunks and wage slaves, simultaneously celebrating and denigrating the workings of the narrow mind. At 51, he is becoming as old as his characters. Can he avoid taking on their mentality as well? In "X-Ray," he becomes one of his characters; onstage, he remained an actor reprising a number of past parts. One hopes that if he returns later this year for a tentatively planned solo acoustic tour, he will perform new material, indicating whether he has heeded his own warnings.  POP REVIEW

Like Mr. Brant's other spatial pieces, "Dormant Craters" comes in a direct line from Charles Ives, who as a boy loved to hear the way the sounds of outdoor bands and carousels and crowd noise would mingle as he stood in the center of a public square. Ives tried to evoke this riotous mix of sounds in his compositions. So does Mr. Brant, who, unlike Stockhausen, favors mixing stylistically different elements.
"Dormant Craters" presented an abundance of defiantly low-tech, unamplified, nonelectronic sounds. There were two jazz drummers (Panama Francis and Warren I. Smith), a gamelan ensemble (Gamelan Son of Lion), a steel-drum group (Pandemonium Steelband), timpani, chimes galore, glockenspiel, cowbells, Chinese wood blocks, bass drums, snare drums (all played by the Pulse Percussion Ensemble), and a gadget fair of everyday items: kitchen pan covers, tin pots, saws. The performers wore crazily mismatched outfits: exotic dresses, ponchos, costumes pieced together from Greenwich Village thrift shops. Mr. Brant, a spry 82, who conducted, made his fashion statement in baggy red pants with matching suspenders and a plum-purple shirt.
Yet "Dormant Craters" was not just a lark. Every bit of the score was notated by Mr. Brant, though coordinations between the various groups are sometimes allowed to be approximate. Given the size of the assembled forces, the music was often surprisingly delicate and distinct. Sputterings of wood blocks and choruses of softly chiming bells would alternate with rat-a-tat drum riffs, outbursts of timpani and clashing onslaughts of metallic noise. The occasional sounds of trucks air-breaking to a stop on West 62d Street and overhead helicopters seemed not intrusions, but part of the ambiance.
Whether "Dormant Craters" will be a lasting contribution to music history was probably the last thing on Mr. Brant's mind. On its title page the work is called a "spatial event." And an event it was. But if a composition's communicative power can be measured by the audience's attentiveness, then "Dormant Craters" was a success. The audience was large, diverse and involved. Many people remained to hear the repeat performance.
This was not a time for pronouncements about a composition's importance. Just being there listening, you felt like a participant.  MUSIC REVIEW
His current album for the same label, "La Tierra del Olvido" ("Land of Oblivion"), juxtaposes old songs and new ones that Mr. Vives wrote with members of his band, La Provincia. It is closer to the Pan-American pop of songwriters like Juan Luis Guerra, but tootling accordion and the modal Andean melodies of the gaita (wooden flute) are still at its center.
Colombia has coastline on the Pacific and on the Caribbean, where it picks up African-Caribbean rhythms, and it extends into the Andes, the home of Indian flutes and drums. Mr. Vives embraces it all. "Soy pacifico, soy caribe" ("I am Pacific, I am Caribbean"), Mr. Vives sang in "Pa' Mayte," which opened the concert, and in the course of the set he alluded to styles from across Colombia, with hints of Brazil and the Caribbean islands. He sang about love, the land and the pleasures of music.
Wearing cutoff shorts and shaking his shoulder-length hair, Mr. Vives bounded around the stage with a boyish grin, singing in a playful, enthusiastic tenor. Girls squealed and rushed forward with notes for him and objects to autograph. At one point, fans handed him a Colombian flag; he kissed it and gave it back.
While Mr. Vives looked like a typical MTV-era pop star, his music kept returning to folky territory. La Provincia combines a rock band (keyboards, guitar, bass, drums), a vallenato group (accordion, scraper and a caja hand drum), a gaita and extra Caribbean percussion, including the tambora drum used in Dominican merengue. But songs that opened with scrubbing funk guitar or portentous keyboard chords soon lightened up with traditional rhythms, and melodic hooks were dispensed not by the electronic instruments but by the folk ones: Mr. Cuadrado's button accordion and Mayte Montero's gaita, sometimes twining their lines.
Mr. Cuadrado also stepped forward to perform his own song "La Puya Puya," about a nearly forgotten vallenato style. "I sing and play the accordion, which is my sole heritage," he sang with rough-hewn vigor. Now that heritage has been thrust into a new pop domain.
POP REVIEW
Oh, there was one slim notion in this program, which juxtaposed the forward-looking First Symphony, written when Mozart was 8, and the valedictory Requiem. In fact, a full-page article in Stagebill addressed that idea (pointing out, too, that the other work here, Beethoven's Choral Fantasy, was similarly apt as being "middle," no matter that Beethoven's middle came well after Mozart's demise). But almost nothing was made of the contrast in the concert, the little symphony being accorded essentially the same sort of gravity and reverence by Mr. Schwarz and his troops as the Requiem.
Elsewhere in Stagebill, in the program notes, appears the standard piety about the Requiem, which was left unfinished at Mozart's death and completed in unknown but perhaps substantial part by his pupil and friend Franz Xaver Sussmayr: "Nevertheless, the work from beginning to end bears the unmistakable stamp of Mozart." But imagine a festival that rather than simply propounding such easy and arguable wisdom, would put it to a test, presenting the Requiem alongside works by the all but unknown Sussmayr, letting listeners take the measure of the composer and judge for themselves what he might have had to contribute to the Requiem.
Still, if it had to be Beethoven and there had to be yet another piano soloist, it was fascinating to hear Peter Serkin in the fantasy, a work familiar to many listeners through the performances of his father, Rudolf. Typically, the younger Serkin's playing was more introspective and analytical, indeed almost experimental in its understatements and emphases. Mr. Schwarz, the Pro Arte Chorale and the festival orchestra carried through that searching approach to generally good effect.
As is so often the case, the Mozart performances were pretty good in their all-purpose way, with able vocal soloists in the Requiem: Janet Williams, soprano; Nathalie Stutzmann, contralto; Hiroyuki Yoshida, tenor, and William Stone, baritone. Yet it is hard not to want something more, and more distinctive, from a festival that once traded not in the uniformity of the Mozart experience but in its diversity.  MUSIC REVIEW

THE NEW SEASON/CLASSICAL MUSIC
There is an appealing omnivorousness in his music, which is caught in the transition from Classicism to Romanticism. The Overture to his opera "Los Esclavos Felices" has an Italianate formality and a touch of cheery, Rossinian flightiness. Yet late Mozart and early Beethoven are the models for his more substantial and original Symphony in D and Overture (Op. 1).
The symphony is driven mainly by full-fledged Sturm und Drang chordal blasts and winding melodic lines full of pathos and drama, but there are also passages of lyrical, almost courtly restraint. And however much Arriaga may have been drawn to the Viennese style, the idiosyncratic perspective of an outsider helped him sidestep some of the style's cliches.
The performances Jordi Savall gets from Le Concert des Nations, an international assemblage of period-instrument players, are bright, energetic and alert to Arriaga's penchant for sudden shifts of direction and texture. ALLAN KOZINN
A leafy canopy, for example, hangs over the entire opera, and among the trees Mr. Langenfass has placed tiny red lights. What are they? Stars? (Red ones that move when the scenery does?) Christmas lights? There is also an omnipresent and (presumably) symbolically omniscient statue of the Commendatore. It lurks in a corner from the start of the opera, watching as the Don kills the real Commendatore, then following the Don everywhere, from the Seville town square to the meadow where Zerlina and Masetto are to be married to the graveyard where it belongs. The statue is absent only in the scene before the Don's final dinner party; it must have stepped out to change into formal plaster.
All told, the production's storybook quality suggests that "Don Giovanni" is of a piece with "The Magic Flute," which, of course, is not quite right. But "Don Giovanni" has suffered worse fates than this. What the production has going for it is a good, fairly well-balanced cast that knows how to act as an ensemble, a necessary quality in any Mozart opera.
Two singers were making debuts, and both seemed promising additions to the company's roster. Victor Benedetti sang the title role with a firm, pleasantly smooth baritone that at times seemed to have the depth and support of a full bass. He also showed a good grasp of the Don's character, combining in his portrayal persuasive touches of aristocratic nonchalance, imperiousness and rakishness, as well as the current of elegance required for "La ci darem la mano" and "Deh, vieni alla finestra."
Also new to the house is Richard Clement, whose light, well-supported and attractive tenor did justice to Don Ottavio's music. And Stephen Powell, who made an unscheduled offstage company debut singing the title role of "Mathis der Maler" from the orchestra pit on its opening night, was in good voice here in a considerably less demanding role, Masetto.
Stephen West was a fine Leporello, comic but not ridiculous, and at his most engaging in the Catalogue aria. As Donna Anna, Christine Brewer produced a dry sound at first, but her voice blossomed as the opera unfolded, and it had a lovely bloom and a moving communicativeness in her account of "Or sai chi l'onore." Oksana Krovytska and Nancy Allen Lundy made fine mirror images as Donna Elvira and Zerlina, the one insistent, suspicious and nearly as ubiquitous as the Commendatore's statue, the other innocent and trusting. Joseph Corteggiano rounded out the cast with the Commendatore's few but crucial lines.
The orchestra played well and robustly for Guido Ajmone-Marsan, and there were some lovely coloristic touches in Robert deCeunynck's harpsichord playing.
MUSIC REVIEW
Antonio Rosetti, not to be confused with at least five musical contemporaries of the same name, was born in Leitmeritz, Bohemia, seemingly in 1750. Baptized Franz Anton Rosler, he is also not to be confused with Franz Anton Rossler, a cobbler, as he evidently was in reference works that gave his birth date as 1746.
He adopted the Italian name when he moved to Germany (go figure!) in 1773, to work as double bassist and eventually composer in the highly musical court of Kraft Ernst, Prince of Oettingen-Wallerstein. He rose to the position of Kapellmeister there and stayed until 1789, when he became Kapellmeister at the court of Mecklenburg-Schwerin in Ludwigslust. In 1791, he composed a Requiem to be performed at a memorial service for Mozart in Prague, and he himself died a year later, at 42.
It seems altogether appropriate to the confusion surrounding Rosetti's identity that the one picture of him Teldec was able to locate is of questionable attribution, by an anonymous hand and taken from an original now lost.
As with Heinichen, individual works by Rosetti, generally concertos, have shown up in recorded collections over the years, but no large body of his music has received such concentrated and caring attention as this. The composer positively springs to life whole in these spiffy performances.
The standard numbering by Oskar Kaul lists 32 Rosetti symphonies. Those presented here are No. 23 in E flat, No. 25 in B flat, No. 27 in G minor and No 32 in E flat, all written between about 1784 and 1792.
Like the symphonies of his great model, Haydn, which Rosetti's often resemble, they are full of boldly original and often humorous strokes. But they can also be highly dramatic, so much so that the G-minor work, which opens this collection, is a worthy companion to Mozart's two splendid symphonies in that key.
It quickly spins a sad, quizzical string figure into a stormy climax, lets the sun in briefly, then samples all the intermediate shadings in the most vital yet economical of expositions. The minuet turns the string figure on its head without greatly changing its mood, but the trio section is a quirky little ditty, dominated by oboe. A lyrical effusion of a slow movement gives way to a skittish finale whose dark opening, despite its recurrences, is definitively swept aside by, among other things, another charming turn from the oboe.
Rosetti's fondness for the winds, nurtured by the crack players at Wallerstein, shows up repeatedly throughout these works. And the playing here, especially on horn, by Mike Roberts and Ms. Allen, would surely warm Rosetti's heart all over again.
But it is hard to single out individuals in performances that are all so much of a piece. Those wonderful early-musickers in Cologne have somehow maintained an edge and excitement in their playing that is no longer always evident in more exalted precincts. You can almost hear the delight they take in the unexpected silences of Rosetti's little Luftpausen.
The performances are led by Mr. Ehrhardt from the violin and Gerald Hambitzer from the harpsichord or (in No. 32) fortepiano. The editions were prepared from manuscript for reasons detailed in the notes and with results one can only applaud.
"Rosetti's contemporaries ranked him with Haydn and Mozart," Horace Fitzpatrick writes in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians. And Rosetti's contemporaries, those at least who frequented Haydn and Mozart, knew a good thing when they heard it.
It is probably too much to hope that major symphony orchestras will welcome such revelations as a way out of the worsening repertory bind they find themselves in. Mostly Mozart audiences, after all, wouldn't even sit still for Cherubini last summer.
Still, it is hard to feel too deprived when recorded representations as fine as these come along. And the great good news is all those other works where these came from. Musicians who took such obvious joy in the music at hand can undoubtedly be counted on to keep digging.  RECORDINGS VIEW
But with Lonnie Pitchford and Big Jack Johnson on guitars, the group included two of the best Delta bluesmen alive. Mr. Pitchford's casual, honeyed baritone made the resentment and pain in his blues sound like well-worn memories; he played a twangy, percussive solo on diddley bow, a homemade one-string instrument. Mr. Johnson's voice could be assertive or ominous, and his guitar playing was full of self-taught eccentricities: fast, prickly lines, shivering chords and glints of jazz harmony. Although it was content to play blues warhorses, the New Africa String Band gave them some spunk.
The blues series at the World Financial Center concludes Wednesday with a performance by Guy Davis. JON PARELES  POP REVIEW
Blur was an entirely different bundle of energy. Though clearly in bad spirits on Tuesday, the singer Damon Albarn summoned enough energy to stand on his head once, bash the microphone against his head five times and empty countless bottles of water and beer on the audience. Though bratty enough to give Green Day a run for its money, Mr. Albarn has also become one of England's top songwriters. Performing mostly songs from Blur's last two albums, "Parklife" (SBK/ERG) and "The Great Escape" (Virgin), Mr. Albarn chronicled ordinary, humdrum English lives with an attention to detail similar to that of Ray Davies of the Kinks.
Unlike Mr. Davies, Mr. Albarn judges his characters, turning the Kinks' "Well-Respected Man" into the "Charmless Man" that he is. "Educated the expensive way, he knows his Claret from a Beaujolais," Mr. Albarn sang with a sneer, following it with a chorus of nyah-nyah's. Even Pink Floyd's cross-dressing "Arnold Layne" dons street clothes to lead the monotonous life of "Ernold Same" when filtered through Mr. Albarn's pen.
A versatile band, Blur switched from the punk scrambling of "Bank Holiday" to the high-energy disco of "Girls and Boys," from syrupy cabaret-style showstoppers like "The Universal" to bouncy Madness-style songs like "Fade Away." The band keeps growing in proportion to its range and talent. On this tour, it added a two-man horn section and an extra keyboardist to its lineup. Maybe next time Blur tours, it will take along a symphony orchestra.  POP REVIEW
Lenny Kravitz spends part of his new album, "Circus," straighforwardly preaching born-again Christianity: "God loves everyone/ That's why He gave His Son." As for the Chili Peppers, on their new album, "One Hot Minute," they bring further refinements to their image as pagan party animals while going out of their way to reject biblical fundamentalism: "I was not created/ In the likeness of a fraud."
To make his creed seem cool, Kravitz works hard at his image. The black-and-white photos in the cassette booklet to "Circus" (Virgin) include one  reminiscent of Robert Mapplethorpe's nude self-portrait with a whip and another  that shows a Christ-like Kravitz, barefoot with arms outstretched, standing on the chest of a gray-haired man. (Perhaps he's being resurrected.) But any transgressive thrills stop short of the songs, which sound smug and secondhand.
Kravitz's Bible reading hasn't led him to the injunction "Thou shalt not steal." "Circus" shamelessly lifts styles, textures and ideas from Kravitz's usual sources: Led Zeppelin, Jimi Hendrix, John Lennon and Prince. But with a pinched, nasal voice that makes Prince sound like Nat (King) Cole, Kravitz can't overcome cliches through vocal prowess, and the cliches do pile up: "Life is just a lonely highway" or "You must be walking on shaky ground."
"Circus" unfolds as a passage from earthly travail to the comforts of faith;  Kravitz can't summon much compassion along the way. He simply sneers at unredeemed characters like a high-living rocker in "Rock-and-Roll Is Dead" ("All the money in the world/ Can't buy you from the place you're going to"), a teen-age runaway in "Magdalene" and a hustler in "Thin Ice." The only advice he  offers the overwhelmed nine-to-fiver in "Don't Go and Put a Bullet in Your Head" is "Just turn your life around instead." It's not his problem; he's got his salvation, and others can fend for themselves.
The Red Hot Chili Peppers are more confused and, ultimately, more endearing.  Since the early 1980's, the band members have been taking their shirts off and stomping out funk and hard-rock riffs: boisterous music for rowdy, beat-propelled crowds. Yet for some years the band has tried to reach beyond party music; in its songs, hedonism is part of a neo-pagan philosophy that also calls for honesty, equality and peace amid the lusty encounters.
Like the band's previous album, "Blood Sugar Sex Magik," released in 1991, "One Hot Minute" (Warner Brothers) is a jumble of manifestos, autobiography, mystical conjectures and invitations to "Submerge into the urge of we/ Deliciously the mystery." One song rejects a "homophobic redneck" who's "big and tough and macho." Most of the others are about unity of various kinds, with lovers, friends, the universe: "Transcending flesh could be a breeze."
With Dave Navarro, formerly of Jane's Addiction, replacing John Frusciante on guitar, the Red Hot Chili Peppers are a changed band. Although they can still knock out hefty funk vamps, like the one in "Walkabout," Navarro has moved the band's center toward a volatile hard rock. Just as in Jane's Addiction, new songs have distinct sections; "One Big Mob" jumps from pounding funk to floating psychedelia, while "Transcending" starts as a rippling rumination and turns into a blunt stomp and wail.
Despite its ambitions and style-hopping, the music remains stuck in the late  1960's and 1970's, with obvious borrowings from Hendrix and Parliament-Funkadelic. The Chili Peppers write better riffs than they do songs;  only a few, including "Coffee Shop" and "Falling Into Grace," offer as much melody as propulsion. Too much of the music is drab, leaving the Red Hot Chili Peppers earthbound even as they try to reach a higher plane.
RECORDINGS VIEW
Their set was a return to mid-1970's Los Angeles soft rock. The songs were about dreams and highways, storms and moonlight; they were full of strummed guitars, earnest voices and the Los Angeles trademark, vocal harmonies arranged with lapidary care. The voices echoed those of better-known colleagues; Ms. Bonoff had the tremulous delicacy of Ms. Ronstadt, Mr. Gold the weary sincerity of Jackson Browne.
But writing by committee doesn't work for Bryndle. A promising song like "Take Me In" went on far too long, showing off permutations of backup harmony. Apparently no one in the group was willing to edit out cliches: "We'd close our eyes and dream we'd fly away." The set's best song, "Daddy's Little Girl," was a hymnlike meditation on love and loss, sung by Ms. Bonoff; she had written it alone. JON PARELES
The live performance, presented by the World Music Institute and City Lore,  started tentatively, with the quartet dressed in matching white suits and singing its traditional concert opener, "Who Are We?" The number didn't have the energy, charm or improvisation of its performance in the movie, and lines like "We love to sing" sounded rote. But midway through the concert, as the group's senior member Ira Tucker sang, in his rough, expressive voice, "When it's all over, when I can't sing no more/I just want you to meet me on the other shore,"  the group started to relax and get playful with its harmonies, exhortations and  phrasings. Within minutes, the audience was on its feet, raising its arms in the air to let the Lord's spirit enter them.
Though they have had 16 personnel changes, the Dixie Hummingbirds haven't lost touch with their roots. They've absorbed most of the changes church music underwent in the first half of the century, and it showed in their hard-gospel songs, filled with jubilee-style harmonies and backed very subtly by jazz and rhythm-and-blues drums and guitar. Mr. Tucker was an expressive and diverse singer, able to swoop from a crystalline falsetto to a growling bass. But it was the three-part harmonies and vocal flourishes of the rest of the group that made the Hummingbirds shine, particularly the sweet tenor of Paul Owens, who led "This World Is a Dressing Room," and the octave-jumping melismas of their newest member, Carl Davis, who replaced the bass James Walker after his death two years ago.
"They stand for something," Bobby Womack said of the Hummingbirds in the documentary. Though he didn't specify what that "something" was, by the end of Sunday's performance, it was clear. They stand for old-time religion and old-time entertainment, and the belief that old times are good times and that good times are never out of reach. In other words, hope.
MUSIC REVIEW
Although Pedro Burmester, a young pianist from Portugal, did not receive a top prize in the 1989 Van Cliburn Competition, he made a great impression on the judges. His interpretations were so distinctive he was given a Jury Discretionary Award. This was understandable, judging by his recital on Sunday afternoon.
Though an exquisite pianist, Mr. Burmester, now 32, does not have the kind of attention-grabbing technique that typically wins competitions. He cultivates clarity, fluidity and suppleness and is more interested in breadth of statement  than in edge-of-the-seat excitement.
He played Schubert's Twelve Landler, wistful waltzlike Austrian dances, with  an expressive rubato that made them seem precursors to the waltzes of Chopin. In the first movement of Schubert's Sonata in A minor (D. 784) -- with its spare, self-contained theme, its outbursts of trembling octaves and its consoling, almost hymnal second theme -- Mr. Burmester did not heed Schubert's instruction  to keep the tempo "guisto" (just, meaning strict). But if he did not always follow the score, he touched the music's troubled soul.
The highly reverberant concert room at the Frick is not an ideal place to hear Ravel's lavishly colorful piano music. Mr. Burmester's impetuous performance of the half-crazed "La Valse" was riveting; "Gaspard de la Nuit" was boldly characterized. But surely in a proper concert hall, the enormous sound the lanky Portuguese pianist made would not have seemed so steely.
ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Can you feel it in your soul?" Mr. Burgess sang as he stretched out "Here Comes a Soul Saver." It was this belief in the redemptive and euphoric power of  music that made the Charlatans U.K. stand out from their opening acts, Menswear  and Nancy Boy.
Menswear, from England, and Nancy Boy, from New York, are overseas equivalents of one another. Both are made up of young, foppish socialites who have found a new way to get on the guest lists at clubs: by performing at them.  The first four songs in Menswear's concert corresponded exactly to the first four songs on its debut album, "Nuisance" (London). Its opening number -- named  for the address of a New York girl famous for throwing parties for British bands -- was even about socializing.
Though only in their late teens and still new to their instruments, the members of Menswear show the potential of living up to the hyperbole that the British music press has heaped on them. The band, which already sounds better than its album, whipped through catchy pop songs in a whirl of keyboards and guitars, searching for the right early-1980's British sound in the power-pop choruses of "I'll Manage Somehow" and the quirky new-wave vibrato of "Daydreamer."
Nancy Boy, led by Donovan Leitch (the model, actor and son of the 60's singer Donovan), explored the same period of music that Menswear did, except with more  of a New York influence. With cold, capricious songs and an attitude to match, Nancy Boy might have been the new-wave house band at CBGB 15 years ago. But unlike Menswear, which transcended its origins as an in-joke, Nancy Boy looked better than it sounded.
ROCK REVIEW
Ms. Graves has a classic mezzo-soprano voice with dusky colorings and a wide range, from her chesty low voice to her gleaming top notes. She is a compelling stage actress who exuded the sensuality that any Carmen must have but few do. If anything, Ms. Graves underestimates her charisma. She didn't need to do all that standard-issue hip-swiveling to entice Don Jose. Much more effective was the moment when after her arrest outside the tobacco factory in Seville, sitting on a table with her hands tied behind her back, she slowly lifted her skirt above her knees with her teeth. From that moment, Ms. Graves had the Met audience enthralled.
That said, there was some cause for concern in her performance. There were signs -- pitch that sometimes turned sharp, some inadequately supported midrange singing -- that Ms. Graves is pushing her voice beyond its limits. Her innate sound is clear and vibrant, so she doesn't have to force to project. She need only have listened to her Don Jose, Richard Margison, for a cautionary example of what can happen. Mr. Margison has a hefty physique and a voice to match: a bright, ringing sound. But he seems locked into singing everything full out. He basically ignored the pianissimo turns of phrase that Bizet asked for in the "Flower Song."
There were two other debuts of note. Singing Micaela was the Italian soprano Barbara Frittoli, whose creamy, lyrical voice turned a bit hard-edged when she delivered the forte top notes that cap Micaela's Act III aria, yet overall, Ms. Frittoli's performance was sensitive and involving. In the role of Zuniga was a young American bass, Richard Bernstein, who with his trim, dark looks and resonant voice, has Don Giovanni written all over him.
The excellent Russian baritone Sergei Leiferkus sang Escamillo. The conductor, John Fiore, elicited a rather unsettled, poorly balanced performance from the Met orchestra. But the news was Ms. Graves, who received a tumultuous standing ovation.  MUSIC REVIEW
Ms. Merchant's voice vacillated between soft, melancholy folk singing and barroom soul-emoting. When she wasn't singing, Ms. Merchant did her weird barefoot munchkin dances, a combination of the flapping and stepping common at Grateful Dead shows and the results of introductory courses in African and Arabic dancing.
Though Ms. Merchant seemed awkward and humorless onstage, her audience made up for these shortcomings during the encore. As she accompanied herself on keyboards during a bare-bones version of the 10,000 Maniacs' song "I'm the Man," about an innocent black man sentenced to death by a racist court system, the audience greeted Ms. Merchant's line "He goes free" with shouts of "O. J.!"
Cesaria Evora was in some ways a perfect opening act for Ms. Merchant. A singer of plaintive ballads (or mornas) from the Cape Verde islands, Ms. Evora performed in bare feet, like Ms. Merchant, and succeeded in turning songs into spells by keeping them soft, fragile and melancholy. Luckily, Ms. Evora has spent most of her life singing in the bars of her home country. Otherwise, she might not have been prepared for the Beacon's audience, which chattered loudly through her set.  POP REVIEW
Ms. Carpenter records for Columbia's Nashville division, has won country Grammy Awards and is heard most often on country-music stations. But she doesn't pretend to be a country gal. She grew up in New Jersey, Japan and Washington, and most of her songs are closer to folk-rock and to 1970's confessional ballads than to three-chord country tunes. In her more ambitious songs, she looks beyond the domestic sphere: "John Doe No. 24" imagines the life of a deaf and blind man, institutionalized for 49 years; "I Am a Town" sketches a landscape of a place that's "a blur from the driver's side."
Ms. Carpenter performed while surrounded by framed pictures (including two Hoppers), black-and-white photographs of couples and various keepsakes, each lighted for the appropriate song. But that was the least subtle aspect of a concert that cracked a few jokes and touched a lot of heartstrings.
The Mavericks, a band from Miami that opened the show, are classicists who set out to preserve 1950's and 60's Americana. Their own songs sat comfortably alongside "Blue Moon" and "Tonight the Bottle Let Me Down." They followed the genre rules for rockabilly, honky-tonk country, folk-rock and Tex-Mex pop, with  lyrics that were archetypal and earnest: "I should have been true."
Raul Malo sang with poised, earnest sincerity, particularly when his voice climbed toward Roy Orbison peaks of vulnerability. Yet in its flawlessness, the  music was also hermetic and studied until the Mavericks played "From Hell to Paradise." That song, about Mr. Malo's grandmother leaving Cuba after 30 years under the Castro Government, took on a passion that was more than archival.
MUSIC REVIEW
The Westchester Hudson Opera, which made its debut in April with a concert at Purchase College, returns there next weekend to present "Tosca" as its first  staged presentation. Two of the Metropolitan Opera artists who sparked the gala, Stefka Evstatieva and Theodore Lambrinos, are again featured, along with the young American tenor Richard di Renzi, making his Westchester debut. The music director, Charles Rosekrans, leads a chorus that includes many local singers and, he said, "a full orchestra with many of the finest musicians" in the New York area.
The artistic director, Franco Gratale, said: "We have been working very hard  since last winter to bring the company to this position of presenting a fully staged opera. We have received tremendous support from the community, and we are excited to be the world-class opera company in Westchester with long-term objectives." "Tosca" is scheduled next Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 4 P.M. For tickets, call the Purchase College box office at 251-6200 or the Westchester Hudson Opera at 946-4555.
Today at 1:30 P.M., a family program in the Hudson River Museum presents the  Arawak Mountain Singers and Dancers, the performers including members of more than half a dozen American Indian tribes, their music representing customs of indigenous peoples of the Caribbean and the American plains.
Those preferring classical dance can attend the only New York appearance this season of the Miami City Ballet, under the direction of Edward Villella, today at 3 P.M. at Purchase College.
Also today at 3 the Cypriot pianist Gaswan Zerikly plays Chopin, Liszt and Moussorgsky at Concordia College in Bronxville, a program advertised as being "in the grand romantic tradition."
Philharmonia Virtuosi offers a recital today at 3 P.M. at Purchase College featuring works by Haydn, Pergolesi and Locatelli, among other early masters, then continues its Festival of the Enlightenment with three concerts next weekend. Michael Parloff is the guest flutist in sonatas by several French composers on Friday at 8 P.M. The music director Richard Kapp conducts sundry 18th-century novelties, among them a cantata by Johann Hasse for soprano, glass harmonica and orchestra, and a new performing version of Handel's operetta "Imeneo" next Saturday at 8 P.M. The festival finale, next Sunday afternoon at 3, offers what Mr. Kapp described as "once-in-a-lifetime performances of rarely  encountered Vivaldi Concertos for Two Orchestras," not to mention duo-soloists on flute, harpsichord, organ and violin. Free lectures precede each of the events. For more details, the number to call is 693-5595.
Big-band jazz comes to Briarcliff Congregational Church today at 4 P.M. with  Howie Lawrence leading the Westchester Jazz Orchestra.
Sung Rai Sohn conducts the Sarah Lawrence Chamber Orchestra in an all-Russian program (Kabalevsky, Arensky and Prokofiev) at 8 tonight in Reisinger Hall at Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers. Both the jazz performance and the classical concert are open to the public without charge.
Three trios appearing next weekend provide contrasting musical enticement. Manhattanville College in Purchase will present three faculty artists in recital on Friday at 8 P.M.: the soprano Michele McBride and the bass-baritone Boyd Schlaefer (both members of the New York City Opera) and the pianist Eugene Sabo. They will collaborate on songs by Schubert and Mahler and will also offer favorite opera, operetta and musical comedy numbers. For tickets, call 694-220.
The soloists at the next pair of Performers of Westchester chamber concerts have yet to settle on an ensemble name, but the violinist Ida Levin, the cellist Jeffrey Solow and the pianist Marian Hahn will play Haydn, Arensky and Brahms trios on Friday at 8:30 P.M. at a private home in Rye, with a 4 o'clock repeat next Sunday afternoon in White Plains. For locations and reservations, call 693-1151.
Offering something different in trios, the Caribbean Jazz Project will appear next Saturday at 8 P.M. at the Paramount Center for the Arts in Peekskill. The three performers are Dave Samuels, vibes and marimba player for Spyro Gyra; the  clarinet and saxophone virtuoso Paquito d'Rivera and Andy Narrell, a pioneer of  jazz on steel drums. The box office number is 739- 2333.
The Tarrytown Music Hall also comes alive with jazz next Saturday night at 8, as Al Grey, John Lee, Mike Longo and many other performers gather in tribute to  the late Dizzie Gillespie, the roster including the jazz legend's daughter, the  singer Jeanie Bryson. For tickets, call 674-2005.
A more intimate jazz experience awaits next Saturday night at the Rockland Center for the Arts in West Nyack, where the Two's a Crowd series presents Vera  Mara and Paul Meyers in Brazilian songs with guitar. For directions, call 358-0877.
Halloween is coming, and so are programs for younger listeners. On Saturday at 1:30 P.M., Playtime productions invites children to come in costume to White  Plains High School to meet Mowgli, Baloo and the other characters from "The Jungle Book" in a ballet edition of the Rudyard Kipling classic. On Oct. 29 at Irvington Town Hall, "Elvis Presley's Halloween Bash" will offer what is described as "Las Vegas-style, crowd-pleasing" music. Call 674-0906 for reservations to either show.
"The Hobbit's Halloween Adventure," an original musical for children based on the J. R. R. Tolkien stories, with music and lyrics by Allan J. Friedman and David Rogers, is a holiday presentation of the Westchester Broadway Theater in Elmsford. The production, called "a journey filled with magic, excitement, music and laughs," will be seen at 11 A.M. and 1 and 3 P.M. next Saturday and at the same times on Oct. 28. Call 592-2222 for tickets.
Another original children's musical is "The Witch Who Was Afraid of Witches," at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck, opening Oct. 27 and running through Halloween night. Curtain times on Friday, Monday and Tuesday nights is 7; matinees are Saturday at 11 A.M. and 2 P.M. and Sunday at 3. Call 698-0098 for more information.
The Stein Hall Players of Concordia College have concocted "A Very Scary Concert for Children," John Deak's "Lucy and the Count" heading "a suitably frightening program" on Oct. 28 at 3 P.M. Youngsters are urged to come in costume, and the number for more details is 337-9300.
MUSIC
Neeme Jarvi, a compatriot of Mr. Tamberg's, conducted with a knowing touch and obvious affection, and the orchestra rose ably to the varied challenges. Less care was evident in the premiere of Mr. Tamberg's slight, quizzical "Celebration Fanfare for the United Nations 50th Anniversary," which opened the program. And a performance of Grieg's Norwegian Dances was loose and lackluster, apart from Joseph Robinson's fine oboe solos.
Then there was that assault on Rachmaninoff, a thoroughly dislikable piece of work. Andrei Gavrilov contributed a surpassingly ugly account of the piano part, with pummeling finger work and erratic control, none of which prevented him from showboating shamelessly.
Mr. Jarvi ended with three brief selections from Tchaikovsky's "Snow Maiden." (His recording of the opera has just been released.) The program will be repeated tomorrow evening at Avery Fisher Hall.  MUSIC REVIEW
The Orchestre de la Suisse Romande has the sumptuous sound that is requisite  for the music of Debussy and Ravel: the string tone is silken, the woodwinds shimmer with a reedy warmth, the basses reverberate even at soft volumes. On Sunday afternoon the famed orchestra from Geneva was exceptionally sonorous. Even during the driving "Danse generale" movement from Ravel's "Daphnis et Chloe: Suite No. 2," with the voices of I Cantori di New York joining the massed orchestral forces, the violins were never strident, the brasses never bleaty.
However, what distinguished these performances was their clarity of detail and rhythmic integrity, clearly a priority of the orchestra's stately conductor, Armin Jordan. Mr. Jordan revealed complexities and textures in Debussy's "Iberia: Images No. 2" that are usually glossed over by conductors who exaggerate the music's Spanish inflections and fervor. The last section, "The Morning of a Feast Day," a glorious jumble of bustling tunes and skittish rhythms, was performed with bracing but always controlled energy.
The high point was Ravel's Piano Concerto in D for Left Hand and Orchestra.  Christian Zacharias, the German pianist, vanquished the demanding solo part, with its chordal outbursts and keyboard-spanning figurations. The musical challenge of this dark and remarkable work is to make its many varied episodes into one seamless, arching whole. This was accomplished thrillingly.
ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Although hardly known here, the baritone Francois Le Roux is an established international figure, especially as Debussy's Pelleas, a role he has sung in many productions -- including the Los Angeles Opera's last season -- and recorded. He made an enjoyable New York debut on Monday evening.
The program, roughly tracing the history of the French art song, was wonderfully chosen: three songs each by Gounod, Lalo, Duparc and Hahn, and after intermission, Poulenc's settings of two Louis Aragon poems, Debussy's "Trois Ballades de Francois Villon" and Ravel's "Histoires Naturelles." Mr. Le Roux's pleasant medium-weight baritone began hitting stride, with less tonal grain and  more freedom on top, in the Duparc group ("L'Invitation au Voyage," "Extase" and "Phidyle") and in the first two Hahn songs, "L'Incredule" and "D'Une Prison."
Whether in the more straightforward early songs or the more complex later ones, the voice wasn't imposing enough to take command in sustained lyrical writing, or quite dexterous enough to do so at faster speeds, though Poulenc's tongue-twisting "Fetes Galantes" was a hit. Mr. Le Roux was noticeably more relaxed and personal in the encores: a rollicking adaptation of the La Fontaine  fable "The Grasshopper and the Ant" by Charles Trenet, Faure's "Clair de Lune" and -- in fine, lightly accented English -- Ned Rorem's "Early in the Morning."
Jeff Cohen, a frequent accompanist of the singer, played with considerable technical polish but hardly any subtlety of touch or phrasing, or inclination to try composers' suggestions of soft dynamics. Perhaps these are Mr. Le Roux's  preferences. Still, you can't help wondering how the singer might respond to the collaboration of, say, a latter-day Gerald Moore, or even Dalton Baldwin.
KENNETH FURIE
Retroactive style, happily, no longer carries the stigma it once did. The era of Serialism and experimentation attached an almost moral value to up-to-dateness. "Kinkakuji" uses what we already know with reasonable dramatic coherence. It is an opera of modest ambition and modest achievement. Beneath the musical glitter, not much happens, either on the stage or in the pit. It is rescued in many places by a series of projected images, conceived and designed by Jerome Sirlin, that keep stage pictures clear and uncluttered.
"Kinkakuji" reconstitutes Yukio Mishima's novelistic musing on a true-to-life monk who burned down a revered temple, not in spite of its beauty but because of it. Mishima's perverse take on humanism may be something better pondered in the  dark than looked at on stage. Indeed this opera, with its text by Claus H. Henneberg, turns out to be less an opera than an oratorio with pictures.
The monk Mizoguchi (gallantly sung by Eugene Perry) recalls his past, which dancers dance and stand-ins pantomime. They are like illustrations to the printed page. Music matches mood, not with any great originality but to compliantly dramatic effect. Only the finale falls flat -- a conflagration built on visual hints. The imaginative powers of the mind's eye are overburdened.
The prominent chorus is another oratoriolike feature. Its members stand in shadowy choir stalls at the back of the stage, only their heads visible. There are woozy moments of ensemble singing, but the music survives. Joseph Colaneri achieves sufficiently bright playing from his pit orchestra. Robert Weiss's dancers offer beefcake in G-strings and Maria Montez-like women's costumes. Joel Sorensen's hard, bright tenor is appropriate to the part of Kashiwagi, Mizoguchi's friend. Indeed, all the singing here is strong.
"Kinkakuji" is not a profound success, but it does what it does fairly well.  Its only failure, if there is one, is as a truly Japanese opera. Mishima's violent chauvinism is founded on mistrust of Western sensibility.  Mr. Mayuzumi  dutifully incorporates Buddhist references in his music, but the washes of Impressionism and the imitative counterpoint betray a heart and intellect that have been left thousands of miles from home.
Mishima mourned fiercely for his once-isolated, but now crumbling and corrupted culture. Thinking of the great man as he saw pure ideas placed in the  hands of enemies, I imagine him reaching for his sword.
"Kinkakuji" returns to the City Opera on Tuesday.
KINKAKUJI Opera in two acts by Toshiro Mayuzumi; German text by Claus H. Henneberg; English translation by Christopher Keene; conductor, Joseph Colaneri; directors, Laura Alley and Jerome Sirlin; sets and costumes by Craig Clipper; lighting by Jeff Davis; choreographed by Robert Weiss. Performed by the New York City Opera  at the New York State Theater.
WITH: Eugene Perry (Mizoguchi), Joseph Corteggiano (Dosen), Michael Hayes (Tsurukawa), Joel Sorensen (Kashiwagi), John Lankston (Father), Matthew Bitetti  (Young man), Sandra Ruggles (Mother), Helen Yu (Young girl).
MUSIC REVIEW
Elegiac was not the word for the first half of the Norwegian Chamber Orchestra's concert on Tuesday evening at Carnegie Hall. It was downright funereal, with Grieg's "Elegiac Melodies" (Op. 34) flanked by Magnar Am's somber Study on a Norwegian Hymn and Vaughan Williams's restrained "Lark Ascending."
Where was Grieg's unbuttoned "Holberg Suite" when an audience needed it? In  fact, it, or its first movement, was held in abeyance as an encore and was by then hard put to redeem the evening's stodgy impression.
True, Mozart's lovely 29th Symphony ended the program in fine, vigorous style. The orchestra, conducted by its artistic director, Iona Brown, shaped phrases smoothly and shaded dynamics attractively.
But Ms. Brown opened the second half by leading Stravinsky's String Concerto  in D from the violin, and the work, which thrives on incisiveness, sounded woolly and unfocused. (Ms. Brown also conducted the modestly involving Am work and played the solos in the Vaughan Williams.)
One listener's mind wandered yearningly back to the crack, compelling Australian Chamber Orchestra, heard a week before at Carnegie. Still, there seemed little wrong with the Norwegians that better programming choices would not have cured.
JAMES R. OESTREICH
IN PERFORMANCE
There will be lots more Chopin -- the Variations on Mozart's "La Ci Darem la Mano," five etudes and the B flat minor Sonata -- when Eldar Nebolsin opens the Great Performance Series at the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College. The program next Saturday at 8 P.M. also offers works by Mozart and the contemporary Russian composer Sofia Gubaidulina. This marks the only New York recital of the Uzbekistan pianist, who sprang to international fame when he won the 1992 Santander International Competition.
Providing competition for itself next Saturday evening at 8, the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College is also presenting the Takacs Quartet in its Chamber Music Series. Founded in Hungary 20 years ago but now in residence at the University of Colorado, the Takacs has released three CD's of Haydn quartets, with another on the way. Haydn's Op. 74 No. 2 is the centerpiece of a program otherwise devoted to early and late quartets by Schubert. The box office number is 251-6200.
Another superb string quartet visiting this week is the Brentano, winner of the 1995 Naumburg Chamber Music Award. It will play a Haydn quartet and one by Mendelssohn to open the 71st season of the Hudson Valley Music Club. A Meet-the-Artists reception follows the 2 P.M. recital tomorrow at 54 Clinton Avenue in Dobbs Ferry. Call 693-1489 for more details.
The Westchester Symphony Guild has asked two members of New Rochelle Opera -- the soprano Susan Groeschel and the baritone Alessandro Magno -- to sing arias and duets from "La Boheme," "Carmen" and other favorites at a benefit recital tomorrow afternoon at 2 in a private home in Rye. For reservations and directions, call 632-3289.
Another soprano-baritone team -- Laura Fries and Wayne Neuzil -- rings in the Noonday Getaway series at Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains with Gian-Carlo Menotti's witty one-act work "The Telephone" on Wednesday at 12:35 P.M. The pianist John Lettiere, organist at Christ the Redeemer Church in Pelham, is the accompanist. The information number is 949-0384.
It's not opera, but a free recital this afternoon at 2:30 is devoted to "The Art of American Song." The soprano Allison Hartsthorne will be accompanied by the pianist Patricia Waters at the Warner Public Library in Tarrytown. In addition to songs by Stephen Foster and George Gershwin, the program will display rarely heard pieces by Amy Beach, set to texts by Shakespeare, Browning and others.
Two world premieres emerge from the same wellspring of parental love and remembrance. The first takes place at the opening of the American Symphony Chamber Orchestra's Bard/Vassar Series. In addition to works of Mozart and Beethoven, the music director, Leon Botstein, president of Bard College, will conduct the first performances of Richard Wilson's "Pamietam," a work for mezzo-soprano and orchestra commissioned by the conductor in memory of his father. Mary Ann Hart is the soloist on Friday at 8 P.M.  in Olin Auditorium at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson and next Saturday evening at 8 in Skinner Hall at Vassar College in Poughkeepsie. Those who arrive by 7 either evening can hear a pre-concert talk by Mr. Wilson. For reservations or driving directions, call 758-7425.
Julie Osler was one of the founders of the Hudson Valley Wind Symphony, so when her husband wanted to give her an unusual birthday present a couple of years ago, he commissioned Joseph Willcox Jenkins to write a piece for the Wind Symphony in memory of her mother, "mentioning Gracie's rather progressive side and her love of the Verdi Requiem." Called "Credimus," the new work gets its first hearing on Nov. 5 at a 4 P.M. concert at Ossining High School. "It was a very sweet thing he did," said Ms. Osler, "and I can't wait."
The event that day is the fourth yearly benefit by the Hudson Valley Wind Symphony for the Briarcliff Manor Rotary Club, and the program, conducted by James Wayne, includes James Curnow's "J. F. K. in Memoriam," for which Sandra R. Galef, Assemblywoman of Ossining and Briarcliff, will be narrator. The reservations number is 942-4199.
Philharmonia Virtuosi's two-weekend Festival of the Enlightenment concludes this afternoon at 3 at Purchase College with "Vivaldi at San Marco." At hand, the music director, Richard Kapp, said, "are all of Vivaldi's seldom encountered concertos for two orchestras, with twin sets of flutes, harpsichords, organs and soloists."
Vivaldi's "Four Seasons" gets a refreshing new look in a children's concert today at 3 in Whippoorwill Hall in Armonk. In addition to conducting the Allegro Chamber Ensemble in selected movements of the four concertos, the music director, John Scott Marrone, will explain the pieces and tell the nature stories behind them. "This is an ideal collection for introducing young ears to the beauty and wonders of classical music," Mr. Marrone said, "and the prefaces also enliven the music for adults who may have forgotten the composer's programmatic intentions."
When the Chappaqua Chamber Orchestra convenes next Saturday at 8 P.M. at Temple Beth El in Chappaqua, the Enlightenment will give way to the Blossoming of Romanticism, as the music director, James Sadewhite, calls the program, which will include a suite from Mendelssohn's incidental music for "A Midsummer Night's Dream," the Weber Clarinet Concerto No. 1, with Jon Manasse as guest artist, and Beethoven's "Eroica" Symphony. For ticket information, call 241-0588.
There is jazz at the Conservatory on Friday in White Plains as the vocalist Etta Jones and the Jimmy Hill Quartet usher in the Westchester Conservatory of Music's fall cabaret series. Admission includes a light supper. Call 761-3715.  MUSIC
The music made sense. So did those who talked about it. The audience was not overwhelming but of a healthy size. Its members incorporated just the variegation of humanity that the music sought to address. After some fuzzy-thinking misfires a year ago, Brooklyn's management seems to be getting the hang of events like this.
One thought nagged both concerts: that the division between classical music and jazz has mostly to do with where it is played. Thus, Haydn quartets performed in a bar are barroom music; Ellington orchestra pieces, when lovingly  analyzed and reverently executed onstage, assume the dignity of any chamber music event.
Mr. Schuller was Ellington's relentless pitchman, investing items like "Reminiscing in Tempo" with Schenker-like symmetries of organization. Mr. Schuller talked almost too much, but his words built a frame around this elegant, fastidious and understated music. Very beautiful music, by anybody's standard.
Steven Mayer, an intrepid pianist, played Art Tatum as transcribed from the recordings. Mr. Mayer believes these pieces belong next to Chopin in recital halls; Mr. Schuller made sure we knew that rather than being improvised, Tatum's music was worked out over time and then performed by him with little variation.
Tatum's harmonic allusiveness, his use of other chords and other keys to refer to the chords and keys at hand, creates a panoramic world. A lot of this wide invention, on the other hand, is smothered by a virtuoso gluttony. The runs, scales and sweeping ornamentation are piano playing at its most awesome (most of the time Mr. Mayer keeps up with it), but they overload the natural fineness. Count Basie knew how to leave out; Tatum seemed unable to part with a  single flourish.
When the two cultures meet, as they did on Friday's orchestra program, rarely do the best of both worlds survive. Classical style worked on Scott Joplin's Overture to "Treemonisha" and William Grant Still's "Sunday Symphony" as a contaminant, a debilitator. How tame were Joplin's syncopations in their symphonic straitjacket; how vivid and exciting were the same rhythms in the hands of Nathan Carter's Morgan State University Choir, which sang cleverly arranged spirituals after intermission!
Still is the dean of black composers, and figuratively speaking, his music bears the academic's dignity and sedateness. The symphony is very limited in its powers of expression. Not much happens melodically, harmonically or structurally, and what does seems so boxed in by caution as to be immobile. The  black influences come through but faintly, eaten up and thoroughly digested by the format. Think about "Ebony Concerto," which is bad jazz but excellent Stravinsky.
A "Porgy and Bess" Suite, sung splendidly by Theresa Hamm-Smith and Kevin Deas, showed how effortless cultural assimilation can be in the hands of a great composer (George Gershwin). Yet it was James P. Johnson's "Yamekraw," in Mr. Schuller's big-orchestra arrangement, that spoke the weekend's clearest message. No assimilation, no high-culture upgrade, no cross-pollination, just pure James  P. Johnson speaking through the instruments that happened to be around.
MUSIC REVIEW
Sometimes it just takes a random key to go from detached respect for a musical score to active involvement.
For this listener to Max Bruch's once-famous but long-neglected oratorio "Odysseus" on Friday evening, the key was a boldly original male chorus with a forceful pizzicato accompaniment midway through the second half. That, and setting aside the insufferably pretentious English translation to grapple with W. P. Graff's original German text, which in no way merited such abuse.
So once again, Leon Botstein, instigator and conductor, incurred a debt of gratitude for offering a rare experience of a grandiose and worthy if not immortal work. Mr. Botstein's forces, the American Symphony and the Canticum Novum Festival Singers, had the sprawling score well in hand. The mixed lot of vocal soloists was ably, sometimes inspiringly, led by Jeffrey Kneebone as the homebound traveler Odysseus and Mary Ann McCormick as Penelope, his longing wife.
"Odysseus" is unlikely ever to regain an active concert life and now really belongs on records. It would be nice if these performers could put it there, but prospects are said to be slim.
JAMES R. OESTREICH
On the tap-happy feet of the Rockettes, the paws of costumed dancing bears, the hoofs of reindeer and sheep and the pads of camels, the spirit of Christmas wafted into town on Friday night in the form of "The 1995 Christmas Spectacular" at Radio City Music Hall.
Drawn as though by some tribal ritual and led by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and his family, some 6,000 fans -- many of them donning the false antlers found  at their seats -- gathered for the annual invocation.
Using an elixir first compounded in 1933 and refined ever since, the show, which runs through Jan. 7, invokes the spirit of the season by venerable and modern means: rock-and-roll, those bears (in bright new costumes), Ebenezer Scrooge, Santa Claus and Mrs. Claus and a handful of elves, a Christmas tree and an evocation of New York City at its seasonal best, with dancers in tails and evening gowns, singers, skaters and the skyline seen from Central Park.
And then the most potent forces: the orchestra rising out of the pit, swooping over and above the stage and offering up carols and hymns and classics; the mighty Wurlitzer organ, thundering heavenward through 4,328 pipes; pealing bells; the vast, richly costumed, dramatically lighted biblical tableau that re-creates the story of the very first Christmas, and, of course, the Rockettes.
Smiling and tapping in fur-trimmed costumes of seasonal red, green, gold and  white, in orange rag-doll wigs or in the red tunics and crisp white trousers of  "The Parade of the Wooden Soldiers," they are, simply, irresistible.
LAWRENCE  VAN GELDER
In the middle 1980's, when the alto saxophonist Greg Osby appeared in New York as part of the Jon Faddis group and Jack DeJohnette's Special Edition, he offered the sound of the new. Mr. Osby played cool, streamlined ideas, and he sounded as if he had purposefully shorn his playing of jazz ideas, the blues phrases and tics that are the common punctuation points of most jazz musicians.  Mr. Osby helped found the M-Base movement, which mixed popular music and jazz improvisation, and he began a series of recordings that borrowed heavily from hip-hop. At this point his talent went dormant; without a challenging context, his improvisations didn't add up to much.
Now Mr. Osby is leading an exceptional, acoustic quartet through tomorrow night, and he's giving notice that he's back. He and his band -- James Williams  on piano, Kenny Davis on bass and Carl Allen on drums -- played a group of standards for their first set on Tuesday night, and they made it clear that the  theme-exposition-theme form in jazz is hardly exhausted. He and the band dissolved the tunes, letting them dissipate into free playing at times, or changing their textures by adding improvised pedal-point sections. Mr. Allen set up rhythmic motifs that arranged the pieces on the spot, and the group listened, willing to embrace a freedom that made the tunes' structures reference points and nothing else.
Mr. Osby's improvisational skills have blossomed over the last 10 years, and  his solos brimmed with details. He played staccato phrases, stiff and unswinging, only to veer into the sweetness of Charlie Parker's ballad sound. He swung, opening up unruffled lines. He shouted some blues ideas, or let phrases end on notes that hinted at harmonic possibilities that the tune didn't originally have. Mr. Osby always listened broadly. Now his learning has coalesced into a style, exploratory and fresh.
PETER WATROUS
Mr. Short brought a similar insistency to "I Was Young and You Were Beautiful," an obscure gem by George Gershwin and Irving Caesar. This nostalgic  ditty about a youthful infatuation became an older man's ambivalent reflection on a passion that he wishes he could experience again, despite its foolishness.
These are just two examples of the kind of wisdom that Mr. Short was able to  extract from material that ran from Bessie Smith ("New Orleans Hop Skop Blues")  to Cole Porter ("Just One of Those Things"). Mr. Short's charging pianism, vocal gymnastics that at moments echoed James Brown, and fine support by Klaus Suonsaarl on drums and Beverly Peer on bass, made for a performance whose rhythmic clout matched its ebullient spirit.
CABARET REVIEW
Fresh as this program must have seemed to many ears, half of it was in the form of a retrospective. Mr. Berio's "Thema, Omaggio a Joyce" resurrects the voice of Cathy Berberian reciting from "Ulysses" in 1958. On the tape, words and syllables are progressively shattered and isolated, then regurgitated in varying timbres and dynamics and augmented by echoes. The sensuous sound of words assumes a gradual dominance over their intellectual meaning. Music became the inevitable consequence of speech.
Bruno Maderna's "Musica su due dimensioni" (1963) incites a duel of sorts: Michele Marasco's flute against Nicola Bernardini's manipulations of electronic  sound. Maderna leaves space for on-the-spot action and reaction between the two elements. Created is a frame within which details reinvent themselves from moment to moment.
The other music was from the 1980's. "Post Praeludium per Donau," by Luigi Nono, has a steady, quiet beauty. Giancarlo Schiaffini's bass tuba gurgled gently against Alyise Vidolin's electronic sound, then joined it in rumbling bass tones and tenorial extended notes. Rhythm and interval are replaced by music as a steady stream. The subtlety derived from a less-than-subtle orchestra instrument speaks of Nono's taste and imagination and of the virtuoso skills of  Mr. Schiaffini.
Pierre Boulez's "Dialogue dell' ombre double" at the end created a sophisticated pas de deux between Alain Damiens's clarinet playing and its electronic shadow. Trilling figures and racing scales pursue each other through  loudspeakers around the hall. The dialogue is accented by lighting effects that  direct our eyes and ears first to man and then to machine.
Centro Tempo Reale, Mr. Berio's electronic studio in Tuscany, presented the evening. It was the third in a series examining the Italian avant-garde in various fields. It deserved a bigger audience than the one that showed up on Tuesday.
MUSIC REVIEW
The drummer Victor Lewis did the right thing on Tuesday night for his first set at Sweet Basil: he started a roaring duet with his tenor saxophonist, Seamus Blake. Mr. Lewis, one of jazz's better drummers and a quirky, intelligent composer, set the tone for his engagement (through tomorrow) with a move that left no doubt about his interest in expansive, swinging music.
For much of the rest of the set, the band and Mr. Lewis performed tricky compositions -- one piece by Mr. Blake moved between waltz time and straight-ahead swing -- that were organized around rhythms. He and his band maintained the structure of a piece not simply by following the harmonic contours but also by using a tune's built-in riffs.
But much of the evening's pleasure came from the freewheeling improvising. During one solo by the pianist Stephen Scott, stop-time figures by Mr. Lewis employed silence between abrupt accents; Mr. Scott, playing furiously and with rhythmic persistence, cruised right through it all. And the trumpeter Terrell Stafford found a place in the tumult with precisely placed lines that seemed tranquil but were always situated to take advantage of a piece's swing.
During the 1950's, when plenty of independent record labels were cruising the jazz world, a band working at this level of excellence would have been recording every six months or so. It says a fair amount about the jazz world that Mr. Lewis, a middle-aged musician leading an exceptional band of younger musicians, is without a contract.
PETER WATROUS
IN PERFORMANCE
On "Saturday Morning Cartoon's Greatest Hits," due from MCA Records next week, alternative rock's current brat pack reinterprets the classics of animation. In addition to contributions from Collective Soul, Dig, Sponge and Liz Phair, Face to Face turns "Popeye" into a hard-core song, and Juliana Hatfield and Tanya Donelly sing "Josie and the Pussycats."
Compared with the original versions (most of them pop parodies themselves), these faithful remakes sound boring, showing just how little inventiveness alternative rock now requires. There are a few exceptions, like a distorted reading of "Underdog," the Rev. Horton Heat's rockabilly "Stop That Pigeon" (from "Dastardly and Muttley") and the Ramones taking "Spiderman" to the garage. But for most of these rockers, playing cartoon music means being careless and sloppy instead of creative and playful.
On "Bugs and Friends Sing the Beatles" (Kid Rhino), it is the cartoon characters' turn to try their hands (and paws) at rock. Just as "Saturday Morning Cartoon's Greatest Hits" allows the alternative-rock audience to regress to childhood, "Bugs and Friends" prepares children for adult music.
Instead of simply rearranging Beatles songs for funny voices, the album's producers and writers have offered a parody that plays like a preteen version of "The Rutles," the spoof film from the 1970's. Bugs Bunny seeks spiritual enlightenment in Indiana (instead of India), and Daffy Duck exclaims, "I'm convinced already!" as the chorus of "She Loves You" becomes repetitious. "Bugs  and Friends Sing the Beatles" gets silly, even trite, but unlike "Saturday Morning's Greatest Hits," it is never unimaginative.
RECORDINGS VIEW
The Weill-Brecht collaboration formulates an America (for though unspecified, this country it surely is) reminiscent of Franz Kafka's in the unfinished novel "Amerika." Both are Middle European fantasies fed by a few facts, a collection of fictional film images and many dreams. Place names like "Mahagonny" and "Pensacola" were chosen more for their euphony than for any geographic relevance. While Kafka's tone is quizzical and bemused, the opera greets the cruelty it confronts with an equally cruel stare.
Mahagonny is a gold-rush town rising almost instantaneously out of an unnamed wasteland and running on avarice and unregulated brutality. It houses no heroes, only victims and victimizers. Jimmy Mahoney, its male protagonist, is executed for the capital crime of having no money. Jenny, the object of Jimmy's attentions, is not one to let passion (or compassion) get in the way of self-interest. Jimmy's well-heeled friends could easily buy his freedom, but don't.
Brecht's socialist passions found a friend in Weill's sophisticated embrace of popular music. In abrasive harmonies and stern counterpoint, one hears vestiges of the composer's once-rigorous modernism, but this is predominantly the Kurt Weill of smoky bars and parades: long, sinuous, deceptively simple melodies that at their best soar with anthemlike power. The brass-heavy orchestrations tootle with paradoxical good humor.
The Dexter setting is appropriately working class, but it has a hard time occupying the Met's big stage. The proscenium is framed in dull-gray panels; a white curtain attached to a simple rod opens and closes on every scene. A bar, a cut-out palm, a platform, a few chairs constitute the prevailing rough-and-ready-ness.
There is too much simplicity and too little spectacle to fill up these vast spaces. One kept admiring the endless zeal of principals like Kenneth Riegel (Fatty), Timothy Noble (Trinity Moses) and Helga Dernesch (Mrs. Begbick) as they labored to ee-nun-cee-ate every English word of the David Drew-Michael Geliot translation. All of the principals seemed to find themselves belting to the limits of their techniques, hoping to reach the audience spaces in front of them. "Mahagonny" is grand opera but not inflated opera. It is happier on a smaller stage than this.
Jenny is not always the center of attention, but she is the center of "Mahagonny," personifying the city's amalgam of frailty, helplessness and moral  indifference, all seductively wrapped in sensuality. Teresa Stratas's cancellation because of illness was a big blow to Saturday's performance. Sheri  Greenawald took her place and sang with a diligence that was both earnest and devoid of charm. The scenes designed with Jenny's presence in mind sagged; most  of the others flew nicely.
Gary Lakes sang Jimmy in his aggressive, tough-sounding tenor. Alan Held's Moneybags Billy filled the house easily and agreeably. Mr. Riegel, Mr. Noble and Miss Dernesch labored honorably and agreeably in their somewhat hostile surroundings. David Kneuss's stage direction remembers and reproduces John Dexter's visual sarcasms well. James Levine conducted an orchestra touched with  saxophone, banjo and barroom piano. There was some splendid brass playing.
For one reason or another, Saturday's audience fled the house in a slow but steady trickle. The audience at the end was more than a skeleton crew, but not that much more.
THE RISE AND FALL OF THE CITY OF MAHAGONNY
Opera in three acts by Kurt Weill; libretto by Bertolt Brecht; English translation by David Drew and Michael Geliot. Conductor, James Levine; director, David Kneuss; sets and costumes by Jocelyn Herbert; lighting by Gil Wechsler; choreography by John Meehan. Performed by the Metropolitan Opera.
WITH: Sheri Greenawald (Jenny), Helga Dernesch (Mrs. Begbick), Gary Lakes (Jimmy), Kenneth Riegel (Fatty), Timothy Noble (Trinity Moses), Jan-Hendrik Rootering (Alaska Wolf Joe), Tony Stevenson (Toby Higgins), Richard Versalle (Jacob Schmidt), Alan Held (Moneybags Billy), and Victoria Litherland, Kathryn Day, Hillary Nicholson, Reveka Mavrovitis, Victoria Livengood and Sandra Walker  (Ladies of Mahagonny).
OPERA REVIEW
Orquesta Cubarama's show on Monday night was a reminder that the 1950's and 60's in New York were an extraordinarily fertile time for Latin music. The band, led by the singer Rudy Calzado, is what's left of the band leader Mario Bauza's orchestra; Mr. Bauza, a longtime resident of New York and perhaps the most important figure in Latin jazz, died several years ago. And Mr. Bauza, a great synthesist, brought together Latin rhythms and the sound of the jazz orchestra.
Mr. Calzado's band sounded a bit less than supercharged, as if it were having a bad night, but the music itself spoke about cultural cross-fertilization. The group, with seven horns and skillful arrangements, conjured up the sound of a big band, with thick, fat voicings made firm by the low thud of the baritone saxophone. The band played a blues, over boiling Afro-Cuban percussion, and performed "A Night in Tunisia" by Dizzy Gillespie. It played several Cuban songs, and Mr. Calzado sang. A mambo appeared.
It's possible to make a case that the living soul of the jazz big band exists in modern Latin dance music. Salsa, descended from the music Mr. Calzado and his band were playing, took its cues from the self-conscious borrowing of jazz elements on the part of Mr. Bauza and others. On Monday night the connection was made explicit, the improvisations, the polyphonic explosions of the brass section, the be-bop ideas in the arrangements all blending with the rumble of percussion. There was a sense of adventure to the music that reminded listeners that a time existed when dance music was the field of experimentation, one that led to a New York style.
PETER WATROUS
Todd Crow's contribution to this year's Bartok commemoration was a recital on Tuesday evening in which he considered Bartok as both composer and pianist. With one exception, all the music on the program had figured into Bartok's own performing repertory. The exception -- Liszt's "Five Hungarian Folk Songs" -- has an obvious relevance: examples of Bartok's exploration of similar material was also included, as were two of Kodaly's folkish sketches and Liszt's "Weinen, Klagen, Sorgen, Zagen" Variations.
Mr. Crow's pianism is more assertive than endearing, and he seemed intent on pushing the limits of his technique. Several of Bartok's 15 Peasant Songs and Eight Improvisations on Hungarian Peasant Songs were unruly beyond their native  raucousness. And the hall's acoustics did the pianist no favors. Yet there were  times when he found exactly the right sound and balance. Except for a surprisingly bland introduction, his account of the "Weinen, Klagen" Variations  was animated and full of coloristic nuance, and he gave a lovely, atmospheric reading of Kodaly's "Epitaph."
ALLAN KOZINN
IN PERFORMANCE
The latest advertisement for himself is being presented tonight at 8 on WNET as a pledge-week special, which means 90 minutes are stretched to two hours to accommodate subscription sales. Presented by Mr. Rudas, "Pavarotti: My World" offers what PBS describes as "a global tour" of Mr. Pavarotti's most famous concerts along with his "observations." In fact, this is mostly a glossy scrapbook of excerpts from television and documentary appearances made in the last 10 years or so (no dates are provided).
The compilation of the tenor's greatest hits begins with a ballad by Ernesto  De Curtis, "Non ti scordar de mi," before an enormous throng gathered in front of a dramatically lighted Eiffel Tower, and ends in Wales, where 40 years ago he had his first taste of success singing a duet with Cynthia Lawrence from Verdi's "Traviata." In between, we see Mr. Pavarotti working huge crowds on a beach in Miami, on the Great Lawn in Central Park, in an ornate theater in Beijing and in a public square of his hometown, Modena, Italy. Two London events, one at the Albert Hall and the other in Hyde Park, are attended by Diana, Princess of Wales.
Sprinkled throughout are offstage glimpses of the irrepressible Mr. Pavarotti teetering on a moped, rowing a boat, playing with a soccer ball and kissing just about everybody who wanders into his vicinity, including Princess Di. The singer's observations are not terribly insightful. He performs with pop stars like Bono, of U2, and Sting because of "the most incredible effect to put together two different worlds." As he bellows his way through "O sole mio," with Mr. Domingo and Mr. Carreras shouting along, he considers the size of their audience and assures us that "if you really think of the responsibility of these concerts, you don't sleep."
The program ends with rockets bursting in air after a concert. It's a safe bet that fireworks will continue to be around as long as Mr. Pavarotti wants to  pursue his remarkable career. There is, of course, a book version of "Pavarotti: My World," a memoir written with William Wright, who is "creative consultant" for the program. Avanti, tutti! GREAT PERFORMANCES Pavarotti: My World PBS, tonight at 8 (Channel 13 in New York)
Presented by Tibor Rudas and directed by David Horn. Edited by Emma Joan Morris, Eric Singer and Gary Bradley; William Wright, creative consultant; Wayne Baruch, executive producer. "Great Performances" is presented by an alliance of six public television stations. Mr. Horn is series producer for music; Glenn DuBose, managing director; Jac Venza, series executive producer.
TELEVISION REVIEW
The Spanish baritone Eduardo Del Campo, making his debut as Schaunard, sounded fairly impressive when the orchestration was light. But when the orchestra cranked up, he was swamped. He reportedly sings roles like Verdi's di  Luna, Renato and Rodrigo; you wonder how.
Hei-Kyung Hong as Mimi started slowly but perked up for "Mi chiamano Mimi." She had quite a good Act III, where her slender soprano showed surprising penetrating quality. In general, some work on the Italian text seems in order.
The most take-charge performance was Dwayne Croft's Marcello, which came in pretty much a single color, but an impressively rich one. Stefano Palatchi filled out Colline's lines reasonably well despite the apparent lack of depth in the sound the Barcelona-born bass produces.
Diana Soviero's soprano seems no longer to have much flexibility. As long as  she could prepare for notes, though, her Musetta had some nice vocal ping. What  was heard of the voice's upper range sounded discouraging. Francois Loup was a decent Benoit and Alcindoro.
It was impossible to resist the ebullience and affection of Carlo Rizzi's conducting. Nothing in the score was treated routinely, and there was much lovely orchestral detailing. Mr. Rizzi often seemed to be working closely with the singers in matters of tempo, but he might have reined the orchestra in a bit.
MUSIC REVIEW
Caroline Kyungnan Park plays the piano with power and assurance, and at her recital on Tuesday evening she seemed comfortable in a variety of styles, though not especially persuasive in any. Still, there were interesting moments in all the works she played, and there was a certain charm in the way her program hopped back and forth through historical periods.
Miss Park began with an easygoing, clear-textured and often graceful traversal of Schoenberg's Six Little Piano Pieces (Op. 19), and followed them immediately with contrastingly muscular, driven and sometimes slightly mannered  readings of Brahms's Eight Piano Pieces (Op. 76). She made few concessions to Classicism in Mozart's Fantasy in D minor, beginning with bold strokes and heavy pedaling, and later alternating between a Chopinesque melancholy and, at long last, Mozartean playfulness. And she gave outgoing readings of four Mazurkas (from Op. 50)by Szymanowski and the Chopin Ballade No. 4 (Op. 52).
There was, alas, an irksome sameness about many of these performances. In the Brahms, for example, Miss Park's dynamics tended to stay at a single level over  the course of a musical line, with little shaping or shading. The Szymanowski and Chopin, slightly more colorful, seemed propelled more by determination than  by poetry. What was missing, in virtually all these performances, was the subtlety and suppleness that give music in any style its dimension and drama.
ALLAN KOZINN
The Krakauer Trio, led by David Krakauer on clarinet, hurls the tradition of klezmer music into the rock era. Mr. Krakauer knows klezmer's techniques: the tone that can laugh and cry, the sweeping glissandos, the bursts of speed. With  Michael Alpert, a longtime klezmer scholar, on vocals and accordion and Kevin Norton on drums, the group can sound like a vigorous old-fashioned klezmer trio, but it also has other plans. "Klezmer Woundup," with Adam Rogers as a guest on electric guitar, followed the untempered wails of klezmer clarinet toward downtown improvisation.  "Barak," by John Zorn, fractured a traditional-sounding melody and punctuated it with two-note drum accents that sounded like the title.
The United States premiere of "The Sand's Share" by Mr. Zorn was a sparse, almost ambient rumination on the Middle East. At one point, four of the five musicians blew on shofars, and improvisations were cued not just by hand signals but by musicians putting on yarmulkes. Whooshing wind noise, elegiac modal tunes on cello and oudlike guitar phrases wafted out of silence and drifted away, as Mr. Zorn sat at a desk where a microphone picked up the sounds of his writing on and then crumpling papers -- a chronicler, perhaps, of age-old conflicts.
Shinola, a jazz-rock quartet led by Oren Bloedow on guitar, had some ingenious ways of dressing up two-chord vamps, but little else that was distinctive; Jewish roots seemed incidental to the music. Radical Jewish Culture continues at Merkin Concert Hall through tonight, then moves to the Knitting Factory tomorrow for an alternative-rock night: Lollapajewsa.
MUSIC REVIEW
Ghermann is a considerable stretch for a lyric tenor, but an unusually secure lower range makes the impersonation possible. While a lyric tenor cannot  ride Tchaikovsky's heavy orchestration or convey vocally the extremity of Ghermann's incipient craziness, it was a pleasure to hear the role so attractively sung. And Mr. Gregorian's characteristic concentration produced frequent haunting moments.
Ms. Guleghina, who has sung Maddalena in "Chenier," Santuzza and Tosca since  her 1991 Met debut, produces a full, expressive sound with a fair amount of dynamic control. The winter canal scene of Act III sounded somewhat raw, but the seemingly favorable placement of the singers all the way downstage may not have  helped.
Nikolai Putilin, Dmitri Hvorostovsky and Birgitta Svenden remain effectively  cast as Tomsky, Yeletsky and Pauline, and Mr. Gergiyev remains in effectively weighty control.
OPERA REVIEW
The lyrics of Oscar Hammerstein 2d are so inextricably linked in people's minds with a rigid, right-thinking sweetness and light that to hear them deformalized by Phillip Officer in his new cabaret show at the Oak Room comes as a pleasant shock.
Take "My Favorite Things," a song that is usually conceived as a sugar-coated recitation of items to be grateful for and that is often performed as a cutesy-poo children's singsong. In Mr. Officer's hands it becomes a wistful dream of comforting pleasures sung by someone trying to cheer himself up. The key phrase is "when I'm feeling sad."
Instead of treating "A Cockeyed Optimist" as a perky declaration that all is  right with the world, Mr. Officer gives it an inspirational undertone. In his version, optimism is not something to be taken for granted, but an all-too-ephemeral perspective to be devoutly pursued.
The show, which opened a three-week engagement at the Algonquin on Tuesday, finds this talented singer accompanied by John Bucchino on piano and Kevin Kuhn  on guitar. The spare accompaniments bring out the folkish qualities in melodies  by Richard Rodgers, Jerome Kern and Sigmund Romberg.
Although Mr. Officer can belt, even in his most impassioned moments he conveys an ingenuous open-hearted lightness of spirit. And at Tuesday's opening-night show, even semi-operatic numbers like "Lover, Come Back to Me," "This Nearly Was Mine" and "Some Enchanted Evening" were removed from their museum cases, dusted off and brought outdoors to be freshened and reinvigorated.
STEPHEN HOLDEN
When Mr. Slatkin arrived in St. Louis, he found a respected regional orchestra; the one he leaves has achieved what he calls "a national venue," with innovative community programs, tours, Grammy Awards for recordings of Prokofiev  and Barber (on RCA) and a host of nominations for other performances.
At concerts of new music, or even American music, audiences expect a challenge or a stretch; at pops concerts, they go to relax. Mr. Slatkin brilliantly fuses these twin agendas, making American music accessible through his fresh approach, revelatory grasp of structure, unintrusive rapport with soloists and ingenious explanations before or even during the concert.
Look at his classical choices: he recently led the New York Philharmonic (with the soprano Kathleen Battle) in an evening of Hindemith, Handel, Gunther Schuller and Andre Previn. Next week's Carnegie Hall program has a Peter Mennin  piece subtitled "Moby Dick," a two-piano concerto by Luciano Berio and an Elgar  symphony. True, Elgar is a familiar name, but his symphony? Go ahead, whistle a  theme.
"The music world is a much wider field now than when I was a child," Mr. Slatkin said in an interview He gets his mind around this musical jumble, this "wider field," because he comes by it honestly. His parents, the violinist Felix Slatkin (who was once assistant concertmaster of the St. Louis Symphony) and the cellist Eleanor Aller, worked in Hollywood studio orchestras and founded the Hollywood String Quartet, whose recordings of French, German and pop music, from the 1940's and 50's, are considered classics. Their recording of Schoenberg's "Verklarte Nacht," recently reissued on the Testament label, is still a touchstone.
So is Frank Sinatra's album of ballads "Close to You," arranged by Nelson Riddle for the singer and the Hollywood String Quartet. "I knew Schoenberg and Stravinsky," Mr. Slatkin said, recalling childhood meetings with famous artists  in California. "I was not impressed. Doris Day, yes."
Musicians appreciate his intelligence, efficiency and instinct for what's important. His presence is not in itself the box-office draw. But Mr. Slatkin's  interpretations are lively, conceptually intriguing and audience-friendly.
AS a guest conductor, he leads small works and is a master of short, catchy openers with flashy percussion, like David Lang's "International Business Machine," or the Philharmonic's Jan. 4 premiere of Richard Danielpour's "Toward  the Splendid City" -- New York, that is. It's a vintage Slatkin choice, jazzy, with big brass and rattling percussion.
Although Elliott Carter once walked out on Mr. Slatkin's explication of one of his brainier pieces, which the composer feels speak for themselves, Mr. Slatkin vigorously seeks chances to let words illuminate the music. "In any artistic experience," he said, "the more you can draw the audience into what you're doing, the more communication you have."
He tells how the owner of the CBS affiliate in St. Louis went backstage three years ago to complain that he wasn't getting enough information from the program notes. Treated to Mr. Slatkin's personal discussion of the piece, he asked if the maestro might do program notes on television. A short, informal show was set up, with Mr. Slatkin, a piano and one camera. It is shown at 4:30 A.M. Who watches? About 35,000 households, taping it for viewing at a civilized hour. That's more people than could fit in the concert hall.
That idea led to "Global Podium," a radio program broadcast in the tristate area on WQXR, which currently focuses on one orchestra for four weeks at a time. Last year the topic was a conductor; next year it will be a soloist.
With his own orchestra, Mr. Slatkin can program ambitious works. The newest,  in Sunday's concert, is "Evening Land," a symphony by Joseph Schwantner, who is  on his second stint as the orchestra's composer in residence. After a dramatic orchestral movement, the second movement adds a soprano singing reflective settings of poems by the Swedish Nobel laureate Par Lagerkvist, who wrote the novel "Barabbas." Mr. Slatkin said he admired Mr. Schwantner's "phenomenal ear for color and sound," noting that the piece can be appreciated on first hearing.
He then made a statement so unusual for a prominent orchestral conductor, and so revealing of his roots, that while it fit no expected question, it should be  read and mulled over by anyone who wants to know him: "To this day I would even  go so far as to say that in comparison to quartets, not only opera but most symphonic music pales. Beethoven's symphonies are great, but they're not the last quartets."
Next year in Washington, he wants to continue the television show, but not in prime time. "I like this 4:30 in the morning," he said. "It's certainly cheap enough. We have to explore new avenues. Duke Ellington is from Washington. He's  their most important composer."
Asked about his plans for the National Symphony, Mr. Slatkin said: "The orchestra needs a higher profile and recognition in its own country. It has a very good reputation abroad, and that neds to happen at home as well."
ST. LOUIS SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA Unity Concerts Montclair High School Park and Chestnut Streets
Leonard Slatkin conducting; Linda Hohenfeld, soprano. Works of Haydn, Schwantner and Rachmaninoff. Next Sunday at 3:30 P.M. (201) 744-6770.
MUSIC
With license to do much, Mr. Miller's production is reticence and sobriety itself. The Majestic's freewheeling stage space has been reconfigured to a traditional proscenium. A brief set of steps leads to the kind of Renaissance facade Monteverdi would have known; characters dress in the style of clothes he  certainly wore. Gods and goddesses are got up like statues; they drape themselves around the stage in painterly poses. The paradox of real people imitating trompe l'oeil figures is assuredly not lost on one with Mr. Miller's sense of humor.
Jane Glover, who directed the music, gives the castrato parts to countertenors: David Daniels as Nero and Drew Minter as Ottone. In a bit of subversive bemusement over 17th-century singing habits, Poppea's maid Arnalta becomes a tenor, played decorously in drag by Cesar Ulloa. Miss Glover's small ensemble of instruments uses plucked and bowed strings of the period. Her choices are educated guesses, but that should not trouble us. Seventeenth-century interpreters were more flexible and less literal than the musicians who study them now.
Mr. Miller seems guided by the principle that human sensuality will always be authentic. It needs neither modern update nor lessons in period practice to make its points. To this end, his cast has been minutely coached in an oblique eroticism: the fleeting physical touch, the posture of the body, the direction of the eye. Singers have been chosen for their looks as well as their voices. They are believable objects of passion.
This is all the more effective for being set in a frame of calm and dignity.  The production never abandons the slower pace and gentility of gesture inherent  in the music, yet it makes sure that ornament is not confused with decoration. One hears the testosterone in Nero's trilling and hocketing.
"L'Incoronazione di Poppea" is an essay in vice rewarded: the rise of a woman who deposes an empress, has reasonable men murdered and ends up with a crown. Dana Hanchard is a seductive Poppea. Her soprano is strong and pure and wisely avoids too many virtuoso flights of embellishment. Mr. Daniels is absolutely splendid, with a cutting and decisive delivery that makes him very much an operatic emperor. Phyllis Pancella makes Ottavia's "Disprezzata regina" and "Addio Roma" moments of dignified despair. Mr. Minter puts great passion into his part, but it is a voice too soft and civilized to convey Ottone fully.
The cast is uniformly competent and nicely acclimatized to the world Mr. Miller has laid out around it. Daniel Sumegi is a stolid Seneca, Lisa Saffer a wide-eyed Drusilla. Julianne Borg's comic turn as Valletto devours one of those  moments Monteverdi uses to relieve the heavy doings of his opera. Marguerite Krull, Susan Mello, Steven Stull, Steven Tharp, Michael Brown and Jamie Offenbach are other players.
The simple, elegant set is John Conklin's. Judy Levin made the handsome costumes. The minimal lighting is by Robert Wierzel. Miss Glover's players had rough ensemble moments in early scenes but cohered as the evening wore on. Other performances are tonight, Wednesday, Friday and Sunday.
OPERA REVIEW
To compare his playing today with what it was 30 years ago would be beside the point. Mr. Fleisher's right hand is not yet working as ideally as he certainly wants it to: passage work was sometimes unclear, with little mishaps here and there. But these must have bothered him more than they bothered us. His playing was graceful and crisp, his sound resonant and limpid. The performance caught the essence of this lovely concerto, one of three from 1783 that Mozart described in a letter as "a happy medium between what is too easy and too difficult." The music is genial and uncomplicated, yet subtleties and melancholia lurk beneath the surface beauties.
Those subtleties were revealed in Mr. Fleisher's playing. The almost-too-simple theme of the first movement (a blithely lyrical tune with a gentle broken-chord accompaniment) was tender yet wistful. Few pianists with prodigious techniques can voice chords as tellingly as Mr. Fleisher did in the chorale-like theme of the Andante. The final Allegretto was playful and buoyant, yet when the contrasting theme with its insistent bass pattern in triple figures came up, Mr. Fleisher's playing was almost ominous.
It takes technique as well as musicianship to play with such grace and character. In that sense, Mr. Fleisher's right hand was up to the task. It was his pianism, not just his courage, that deserved the long ovation he received.
Mr. Previn and the orchestra were sympathetic partners in the Mozart. The program began with a clear-textured, radiant yet ponderous performance of Brahms's Variations on a Theme by Haydn. Beethoven's Symphony No. 4 was better served on this occasion by Mr. Previn's penchant for clarity and weightiness.
MUSIC REVIEW
Having spent most of his career in Leipzig, as Bach himself did, Mr. Masur comes by a proper respect for the composer's music naturally. But his approach is refreshingly vital and free of any orthodoxy.
In the Mass, he combined elements of "historic" and modern practice, in most  choruses adding the American Boychoir to the mixed, adult voices of the New York Choral Artists. In the process he set himself difficult problems of balance, which he then gleefully solved.
The 35 or so boys combined with 30 women against a mere 20 hard-working men.  The orchestra of about 45 players was bottom-heavy, with four cellos and four double basses, undoubtedly to compensate.
To it all, Mr. Masur applied his fine ear for the weighting of individual lines, producing a performance in which every voice spoke. It was as if he had tailored the forces in each movement specifically to the qualities and needs of Avery Fisher Hall, and the fit was invariably good.
Mr. Masur kept the sound buoyant and the pace brisk. Irregular feints, leaps  and jabs in the Osanna seemed calculated to keep the chorus slightly off balance and spontaneous in its joyous outbursts.
Of the vocal soloists, Janis Taylor, a mezzo-soprano heard too rarely in New  York these days, gave special pleasure with her chocolate-y sonority. William Stone, a baritone, was excellent in "Et in Spiritum Sanctum" but literally out of his depth in the bass reaches of "Quoniam tu solus Sanctus."
Edith Wiens, a soprano, and John Aler, a tenor, also gave satisfactory performances when happy in their ranges, though Ms. Wiens's intonation was often precarious and her tone sometimes grainy.
The program will be repeated this evening and on Tuesday.
MUSIC REVIEW
But the episodic score has some intriguing materials -- manic, jazzy piano riffs, pensive music for strings, bell-like shimmerings in the winds and brass -- and Ms. Thomas has a vivid ear for instrumental color. Though the young pianist Sara Wolfensohn seemed a bit tentative, she played the almost anti-virtuosic solo part with ringing tone and dutiful clarity.
The Ginastera work is a sort of Argentine "Appalachian Spring." Each of its 12 linked sections highlights different combinations of instruments. (The work begins with just a languidly lyrical solo cello and a harp mimicking a strummed  guitar.) Only in the frenzied, exuberant final section does the full orchestra burst forth.
Mr. Schwarz and the orchestra performed both works vividly. The conductor seemed to be trying to bring some weightiness to Beethoven's Seventh Symphony, but it mostly sounded heavy-footed.
MUSIC REVIEW
Next to these works, Dvorak's sprightly piano concerto, with the superb Garrick Ohlsson as soloist, seemed like music of great substance. This piece has been the poor cousin of Romantic piano concertos, with some justification. Dvorak handles the piano uncertainly: the structure is repetitive, and the music, though tuneful, is not highly inventive. However, this performance used an alternative edition with various piano passages reworked effectively by Vilem Kurtz, and Mr. Ohlsson's arresting playing, well supported by Mr. Jarvi and the  orchestra, was incisive, nuanced and technically prodigious.
MUSIC REVIEW
NOFX is going to receive a lot of angry letters from Grateful Dead fans after this album is released. "Birds sing; there's not a cloud in the sky/ August 8th is a beautiful day/ I see a bunch of hippies crying/ Yeah, August 8th is a beautiful day," Fat Mike bawls in "August 8th." Maybe nobody told him that Jerry Garcia died on Aug. 9 last year.
NOFX is a punk's punk band. In fast, tuneful songs, it bashes hippies, MTV,  racists, big business and those who sell their ideals short, espousing all the precepts of a good punk band. And NOFX knows these conventions so well -- it has been making music for 12 years -- that it has no qualms about parodying itself and the punk milieu.
Its songs manage to be funny without being stupid, and the bassist, singer and trumpet player El Hefe rounds out the band stylistically with remarkable vocal and musical impressions. In "Bleeding Heart Disease," NOFX parodies "Do-Re-Mi" with lines like "L.A., such a nice place to get shot." Though there are more laughs and catchier melodies on the band's 1994 album "Punk in Drublic," "Heavy Petting Zoo" still stands out as one of the most infectious and obnoxious albums in recent memory.
NEIL STRAUSS
POP MUSIC
Three o'clock this afternoon is swing time at Crowell Hall, Wesleyan University, as Roy Wiseman leads the New World Jazz Orchestra and the guest vocalist Lisa Miriem in a program dubbed "Birth of the Big Bands," since it features music made famous by ensembles headed by Cab Calloway, Paul Whiteman, Duke Ellington and Count Basie.
Coming up later in the week in Memorial Chapel at Wesleyan are three recitals by young winners of national organ competitions: John Swandt plays an 8 P.M. Friday program, Colleen Kelsey appears Saturday afternoon at 4 and Erik Suter closes the cycle Saturday evening at 8. There will also be a panel discussion, "An Old Instrument, A New Millennium," back in Crowell at 2:30 P.M. on Saturday. For more details of these free events, call 685-3355.
In a mid-week campus concert, the violin-piano duo of Gerard Rosa and Linda Laurent play sonatas by Beethoven, Ives and Scarlatti at Central Connecticut State University (832-2900), and back in New Haven, a pair of orchestral concerts enlivens the weekend at Woolsey Hall.
Friday evening at 8, the Polish composer-conductor Krzysztof Penderecki conducts the Yale Philharmonia in Shostakovich's Sixth Symphony and the conductor's own Flute Concerto, with Ransom Wilson as soloist (432-4157). At 8 P.M. Saturday, the group's music director, Shinik Hahm, leads the Yale Symphony  in Brahms's Fourth Symphony and, with Anders Martinson, a Yale senior, Ravel's Piano Concerto for the Left Hand (432-4140).
In other orchestral events this week, Samuel Wong is guest conductor of the Hartford Symphony. The 8 P.M. Tuesday and Wednesday programs at the Bushnell will juxtapose Bartok's Concerto for Orchestra with Dvorak's Cello Concerto, the latter featuring Matt Haimovitz. Friday and Saturday evenings at 8, Danny Holgate mounts the Pops podium at the Bushnell with a program called "Puttin' on the Ritz" with the music of Irving Berlin (244-2999).
A program called "An Imperial Russian Winter," at 8 P.M. on Saturday in the Norwalk Concert Hall, brings together the Norwalk Symphony, Fairfield County Chorale and the mezzo-soprano Susan Yankee-Friend (a Connecticut native and Yale graduate). On the program of Jesse Levine, music director, are Rimsky-Korsakov's "Russian Easter Overture," "Polovetsian Dances" from Borodin's "Prince Igor" and Prokofiev's cantata "Alexander Nevsky," with the pulsing "Battle on the Ice" (866-2455).
Friday at 8, the Stamford Center for the Arts continues its monthlong celebration of black history with an evening of gospel music featuring Inez Andrews, the Soul Stirrers, Clarence Fountain and the Blind Boys of Alabama (325-4466).
The Mendelssohn Choir offers classical music at 8 P.M. Saturday, performing a pair of 20th-century works that Carole Ann Maxwell, music director, calls "Canticles of Ecstasy." One is Vaughan Williams's "Serenade to Music," a setting of lines from "The Merchant of Venice"; the other, with Frank Runyeon as guest narrator, is Honegger's oratorio based on the biblical tale of King David (330-2204).
Folk fans may repair to Norwalk Community-Technical College Friday evening at 8, when the singer-songwriters Christine Lavin, Sally Fingerett, Megon McDonough and Debi Smith explore "Life According to Four Bitchin' Babes." Some songs are touching and lovely, others howlingly funny (857-7157).
Solo and ensemble songs are half the attraction next Sunday afternoon at 3 when "High Notes and High Tea" are served at South Congregational Church in Hartford. The refreshments are being prepared by Robert Evans, a chef, while food for the soul arrives earlier via Mahler and Schumann lieder sung by Richard Donohue, music director, and a quartet from the South Church Choir. The program, with piano accompaniments by Ann Kelly, is free, but donations to the music program will be gratefully accepted (249-8627).
If you'd prefer an instrumental outing next Sunday afternoon, the violin-cello-piano trio of Maria Bachmann, Semyon Fridman and Jon Klibonoff play works by Beethoven, Brahms and David Sanford in a 3 o'clock recital for Newtown  Friends of Music at the Edmond Town Hall (426-6470). At 4, Friends of Music of Fairfield County convene at St. Paul's Lutheran Church in Westport to hear the Millennium Ensemble in works by Beethoven, Milhaud, Dvorak and John Novacek (227-7441).
Finally, on Thursday evening at 8, the Veryovka Ukrainian National Company makes Jorgensen Auditorium a stop on its first American tour, the dancers and musicians showcasing "historical ballads, Cossack songs, scenic compositions and holiday rituals" (486-4226). Next Sunday at 4, "Ancestral Spirits" visit the Stamford Palace. The work is an original story by Eugenia Jelani interpreted by members of Connecticut- and New York-based African, Latin American and Caribbean dance troupes (325-4466).
MUSIC
Male bonding reaches a peak of benevolence in imbube, the choral music of southern Africa, which was performed by Black Umfolosi on Saturday night. Created by migrant mine workers living in all-male hostels, imbube is music for  unaccompanied choirs in which a lead tenor shares a call-and-response with the ensemble's chordal riffs and refrains, rich in bass voices and consonant harmonies. Imbube is kin to doo-wop and hymn singing as well as to African vocal traditions; the refrains drive the music like a breath-powered locomotive. As American vocal groups have, competing choirs also developed dance routines to go with their songs.
The best-known imbube group is Ladysmith Black Mambazo, the Zulu choir from  South Africa. But across the border in Zimbabwe, the Ndebele, who speak a language related to Zulu, perform in such groups as the eight-man Black Umfolosi. The styles are similar, but some of Black Umfolosi's songs depart from the Zulu group's three-chord harmonies, hinting at Zimbabwe's Shona music. As a  choir, Black Umfolosi is overqualified; its singers are all dancers, and although the program did not include it, the group also turns into a band that plays mbaqanga, southern African rock.
Black Umfolosi started its concert with unaccompanied imbube songs about love, African unity and the environmental consequences of war. In one song, about the rivers that border Zimbabwe, the music changed to suggest each neighboring country the lyrics mention. For the second half, Black Umfolosi returned to perform dances from Kalanga, Shangaan and Ndebele ceremonies. With spears and shields, they became hunters, harmonizing and whistling birdcalls. Their finale was a gumboot dance, an exuberant rhythmic workout invented by miners, with rhythms clapped, stamped and slaped on rubber boots while the men sang about hard work and low pay. Black Umfolosi cued audience participation, graciously ignoring the rhythmic incompetence that ensued.
JON PARELES
When we add to all this perfection ensemble music that responds to every word and gesture of Lorenzo da Ponte's libretto, it becomes clear that "Cosi Fan Tutte" is the best opera we have ever had. Yet Mozart's people confuse the issue. Why, for example, are we so deeply moved by Fiordiligi, an apparent dumbbell of vacillation? How can we respond so acutely to Ferrando's "Un' aura amorosa" knowing the casual contempt that has led to his deeds? The trio of farewell in Act I is, geometrically speaking, sheer farce, but it is also a wondrous look into Mozart's musical heart.
The Metropolitan Opera's handsome and respectful new production of "Cosi" opened on Thursday night, with Carol Vaness and, in her Met debut, Cecilia Bartoli. It does not resolve these puzzles of interpretation, largely because da Ponte and Mozart never resolved them either. The paradox of "Cosi" is that it is both thoroughly constructed and, in matters of the heart, unfinished. We can only listen, look and wonder at it.
Cynicism over feminine constancy is the engine driving "Cosi." Don Alfonso wagers two young suitors that with a minimum of fakery and disguise, their fiancees will switch partners within 24 hours. Don Alfonso gives the Enlightenment a bad name; he is reason turned on its dark side. He and reason will win, but that doesn't mean Mozart likes it. His heart is with the self-deluding passions of his women, Fiordiligi and Dorabella. He finds transcendence in their brainlessness; he will take sentiment over good sense any day. In Lesley Koenig's production, even the maid, Despina, comes to abandon her mockery. The Met's finale is a happy ending in terms of equidistant plot lines but a bitter one for brides and grooms.
Ms. Vaness's innate dignity plays well against Fiordiligian ditsiness. Ms. Vaness attacks her harrowing set pieces with considerable success. From Susanne  Mentzer and Dwayne Croft, as Dorabella and Guglielmo, issue waves of smooth vocal beauty. Singing Don Alfonso, Thomas Allen demonstrates the understated imperiousness of one accustomed to command. When pressed, Jerry Hadley's Ferrando becomes unpleasant to listen to; but when his tenor is left quietly to  reflect, the musicianly qualities appear.
The subtitle to this evening was "Cecilia Bartoli Meets the Met," the instantly beloved Italian mezzo making her house debut in the low-flying soprano role of Despina. It is a curious way for a major performer to back into  a major house. The role of Despina is not a star turn. It contains the opera's most conventional music, which is supported for the most part by the thinnest wisps of instrumental accompaniment.
Miss Bartoli's lovely voice and telling diction make their peace with this big house, but I doubt she p'ssesses the power-charged sound to dominate it. Despina, on the other hand, is not the fairest of measuring devices, so let us wait and see. What is clearly transmitted, even from a distance, is the vivid sense of comedy, the telling gesture and accentuation, the deft movement.
Michael Yeargan's seaside set gives off Mediterranean sun and heat; one almost feels the sweat and flies. Colors have an engaging softness. Inner frames render the stage more manageable for intricate musical interchange; scenes tend  to be pushed toward the front of the stage and closer to the audience.
James Levine conducted gracefully and with an enthusiasm prodded not a little by one of the more receptive and happy Met audiences in recent memory.
COSI FAN TUTTE
Opera in two acts by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, libretto by Lorenzo da Ponte; conductor, James Levine; production by Lesley Koenig; sets and costumes by Michael Yeargan; lighting by Duane Schuler. At the Metropolitan Opera.
WITH: Carol Vaness (Fiordiligi), Susanne Mentzer (Dorabella), Cecilia Bartoli (Des- spina), Jerry Hadley (Ferrando), Dwayne Croft (Guglielmo) and Thomas Allen (Don  Alfonso).
MUSIC REVI@W
We live in a culture in which simulated murder is an accepted form of play.  Such games are the only way we're allowed to live out our destructive impulses without crossing moral or legal boundaries. On two new albums -- "Murder Ballads" by the morbid rock singer Nick Cave and "Str8 Off tha Streetz of Compton" by the gangsta rapper Eazy-E -- creating fictional murder scenes serves another function as well.  Death pervades almost every song on both albums, unraveling in violent, bloody and senseless transgressions. The grim tales don't just provide shock value, nor are they simply outlets for suppressed fantasies.  These are albums in which those who feel closest to death in their everyday lives, either spiritually (Nick Cave) or physically (Eazy-E, who died of AIDS last year), try to dominate it in their music.
Mr. Cave (from Australia) and Eazy-E (from Compton, Calif.) come from different backgrounds and speak to different audiences, but, musically and verbally, they are in many ways kin. On "Murder Ballads," women are bound and shot, heads are blown across barroom counters and dead dogs are nailed to their  owners' doors. "Ob "Str8 Off tha Streetz of Compton," ex-girlfriends are shot, heads are smashed with baseball bats and passers-by are randomly slain.
It's often difficult to tell which record is supposed to be the gangsta rap one. Making this distinction even tougher is the fact that the prototype for all gangsta-rap fantasies appears on Mr. Cave's album: "Stagger Lee," the ballad about the cold, cruel, untouchable barroom killer whose mythical exploits have been chronicled in hundreds of folk, blues, rock and rap songs.
Mr. Cave updates the tale with the same obscenities that have become a staple of gangsta rap. At the end of the song, a woman of easy virtue attempts to seduce Stagger Lee. As she does, her boyfriend walks into the bar; Stagger Lee instructs him to get on his knees and then blows him away without a second thought. In Eazy-E's "Sorry Louie," the song's main character comes on like a descendent of Stagger Lee. In the last verse, he is depicted having sex with a woman in the back of a car when he spots the girl's boyfriend crouching behind the automobile. The boyfriend is brought to his feet and promptly killed.
In "Sorry Louie" and "Stagger Lee," Eazy-E and Nick Cave use sound effects, like screams and screeches, to turn their songs into unsettling dramas. It is a  technique used in the noisy collages of rap, adding a street intensity, but it is uncommon in rock music. Mr. Cave, however, has always seen analogues between  the mythical past of Australia, formerly a prison without walls for British convicts, and the dark, lawless American landscape of Flannery O'Connor novels,  folk ballads like "Stagger Lee" and now rap's urban cowboys.
MURDER BALLADS" IS about more than story-telling. In each song, Mr. Cave meticulously creates a macabre fable and then distills it to a single image of death in much the way a photographer arranges a studio shoot. For example, in "Where the Wild Roses Grow," a tale of seduction and murder sung with the Australian pop princess Kylie Minogue, Mr. Cave plays a killer enraptured with the poetry of his act. "I kissed her goodbye, said 'All beauty must die,' " he croons. "And I leant down and planted a rose 'tween her teeth."
Like Mr. Cave, Eazy-E, who is said to have recorded this album before he was  aware he was infested with H.I.V., chooses his scenarios carefully. He usually correlates murder and sex with rough lyrics delivered in a distinct voice: half  clown, half rogue. In songs like "Nutz Onya Chin," running wild in the streets to "play a nigger's life like a puppet" puts the singer in the mood for sex. Similarly, in Mr. Cave's "O'Malley's Bar," a 14-minute song that details the slaughter of the patrons of a small-town pub, the killer, a formerly harmless member of the community, feels his virility increasing with each shot.
For Eazy-E and Mr. Cave, killing and sex are power relationships, allowing the downtrodden to take away life or to create it. But they also know that all this slaying is just an escape from confronting their own destiny, so each includes a depiction of his own death on his album. In a version of the folk ballad "Henry Lee" (a duet with P. J. Harvey), Mr. Cave sings of being stabbed with a penknife and tossed into a well by a woman who unsuccessfully tried to seduce him. In one song, Eazy-E raps that he lives by the gun and will die by it, and then imagines the epitaph on his tombstone.
But a song is only a song. Unable to choose his fate in real life, Eazy-E died without the machismo that rap aspires to. He was not shot, stabbed or lynched. His death as a result of AIDS serves as a warning to rap fans. Songs like "My Baby'z Mama," in which he brags of unprotected sex, now sound foolhardy instead of ruthless. Eazy-E's death coincides with the decline of gangsta rap as a major commercial force. It is not dying because people are sick and tired of hearing rape and murder fantasies, but because they're sick and tired of hearing the same ones. Still peddling death and violence to l'rge audiences are other rappers, industrial rockers, heavy-metal groups and arty singers like Mr. Cave,  not to mention operas with high body counts, from Puccini's "Tosca" to Berg's "Lulu." Gangsta rap is disappearing, but perhaps it's only to make way for opera-gangstas, art-gangstas and gangsta-rockers.
POP VIEW
The saxophonist Wessell Anderson is best known for spending a handful of years in Wynton Marsalis's group, which either elevates him or buries him, depending on what one thinks of Mr. Marsalis. Such are the divisions in the jazz world. But "The Ways of Warmdaddy," on Atlantic is one more suggestion that generalizing about younger jazz musicians as simple conservatives is an invitation to be wrong. The album moves around freely, from the sound of the black church, in "Sunday Soulful Supper," performed by a quartet that includes the pianist Ellis Marsalis, to a solo performance of "Mood Indigo." Four pianoless selections, including "Rockin' in Rhythm," recall everything from Henry Threadgill's group Air to the work of the saxophonist Steve Lacy.
Mr. Anderson can be an extraordinarily intelligent and original improviser. On a number called "Change of Heart Blues," for instance, his playing brims with odd phrases and clever rhythm play, resulting in a solo that is as memorable as  a good melody. All his improvisations have that clarity, emerging slowly in measured prose. Mr. Anderson largely avoids cliches, but if one pops up, it becomes just another melody to play with. Even the hardest phrases fit perfectly; Mr. Anderson's sense of time is unperturbable.
His last album, "Warmdaddy in the Garden of Swing," showed he had an ear for writing melodies, and he clearly hasn't lost it. But it is his improvisations, playful, framed by silence and underscored by his dry, realistic sound that hint that this musician, already an important member of his generation, is on his way to bigger things. Los Pleneros de la 21
In the 1950's and 60's, the bomba and plena, two percussive and soulful Puerto Rican musical forms, rose out of their neighborhoods and became pop music that reached New York. But they lost commercial steam in the 1970's and returned to groups like Los Pleneros de la 21, who work the folk circuit. "Somos Boricuas," carefully produced for his new label, Henry Street, by Peter Siegel,  walks the line between folk music and pop; it is heavy on drums and the strings  of the quatro, a mandolinlike instrument, occasionally uses piano, or accordion, and is fully suited for the dance floor. The melodies are gorgeous and the tunes perfectly arranged, precise rhythms making way for singing or a drum section.
Black Religious Field Recordings
Collected by the Dr. Livingston of American music, John Lomax, for the Library of Congress, these "Negro Religious Field Recordings From Louisiana, Mississippi, Tennessee (1934-43), Vol. I" bristles with the informal music-making that was once taken for granted in many rural areas of this country. The first three tunes, by Austin Coleman and recorded somewhere in Louisiana in 1934, are shocking in their force, with tumultuous percussion and transcendent shouting and moaning. Coleman sings the way a drummer plays, patterning phrases, and changes from English to French. It's rare music and an inch from Africa.
The rest of the recordings wander from the more formal jubilee style to unusual harmonica-led gospel music. The Silent Grove Baptist Church Congregation supplies several groups from its members. None of it is in the range of the commercial gospel and blues recordings of the time, the sound of community as rendered by clapping and voices. (Document Records, available from Roots and Rhythm, 510-525-1494.)
Mr. Chailly won't let them do either. In "La Mer" on Saturday, Debussy's wind choirs ballooned into prominence. Long phrases were pointedly subdivided into smaller ones. Both tendencies prevailed through three days of music. Tchaikovsky's Fourth Symphony on Friday turned the Concertgebouw's violins into  lean, gray muscle, making the orchestra into what many Europeans imagine American orchestras to be (though they rarely are any more). Given the immense talent of both parties, there was not a dead moment in three days of music. Everywhere was uneasy brilliance: the Concertgebouw diligently humoring its conductor's iconoclastic agenda; he making sure his ideas flattered the splendid skills of his brass and wind players.
Give or take a few principal players, Sunday's concert dispensed with strings altogether, featuring a new orchestration of Mussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition," Hindemith's often raucous "Kammermusik No. 1," Shostakovich's "Jazz Suite" No. 1, and the Suite from Weill's "Threepenny Opera." Contemplating the gray-haired eminences of the Concertgebouw as they crooned "Mack the Knife" on their instruments was indeed an experience.
So why do marriages last? Money is one reason, and Mr. Chailly has brought the orchestra fat recording contracts after a number of lean years. Maybe a perverse mutual admiration as well. Mr. Chailly has made these players very good at what they don't really want to do, and they know it.
More often than not, opposites repel. Riccardo Muti tried for 20 years to turn the Philadelphia Orchestra into the bright, bouncy virtuoso ensemble that Italian conductors dream of having in their own country but probably never will. In the aftermath of Mr. Muti, the Philadelphia's playing under Wolfgang Sawallisch sounds like a sigh of relief. On the other hand, how are we to explain Zubin Mehta, whose worst qualities precisely matched the worst qualities of the New York Philharmonic and insured a long period of mediocrity for both?
Mr. Chailly loves to go against the grain: Stravinsky's nervous high bassoon  at the beginning of "Le Sacre du Printemps" made to coo ever so sweetly; Tchaikovskian effulgence made toughly athletic, the slow-movement oboe solo pushed forward almost against its will; the haze of Ravel's tootling arpeggios in the second "Daphnis et Chloe" Suite exposed to cold, hard sunshine. Yet the Stravinsky was beautifully organized and its performers impregnable. Nothing Mr. Chailly asks of this orchestra is refused.
The Mussorgsky orchestration, by a Concertgebouw member, Geert van Keulen, offers a stark rebuke to Ravel's ice cream sundae version. The separations of colors are sharp and bleak-sounding; one is reminded of a European military field band raised to a higher level of sophistication. The Shostakovich evokes the word "jazz" but is more about Eastern European tea dances or a kiosk concert in the park. Johan Wagenaar's Overture to "The Taming of the Shrew" on Friday was a busy narrative in sound, spilling out bright sounds and churning with subdivided string parts.
Maxim Vengerov wowed Friday's listeners with a powerful performance of the Sibelius Violin Concerto and then melted their hearts with Massenet's familiar "Meditation" as an encore.
MUSIC REVIEW
Somewhere under all that jazz virtuosity lurks a spare, self-edited performer with a pop singer's ability to appreciate simplicity. On "Home," an older tune Ms. Eade learned from a recording by Helen Humes, she let the melody  carry her performance, and it ended up being the most powerful moment of the night, full of autumnal longing. She also sang Thelonious Monk's "Crisscross," wordlessly, but for all its intricacies and be-bop rigor, it didn't linger the way "Home" did; it was school, not art.
PETER WATROUS
JAZZ REVIEW
At times one suspects him of contrariness, of oddity for oddity's sake. He sets every note brilliantly in place but plays games with the attendant markings. He executes dynamics with an exaggerated literalness that creates arresting, alienating peculiarities. A short crescendo over three notes turns into a loud tattoo. Fortissimos crash from nowhere. The pedaling of slow recitatives in the "Tempest" generates tone clusters. Where nothing is marked, as in certain rapid, repetitive passages in the "Tempest" finale, notes pass in  an affectless mezzo-forte blur.
In the first measures of the E flat major sonata, Mr. Pollini deconstructed some of Beethoven's most imaginative scene setting: he adopted a neutral tone for the dreamily ambiguous chords that set the piece in motion, slowed to a heavy crawl, then resumed in a breathless tempo faster than the outset. The whole sonata sped past in under 15 minutes; the delightful bouncing motion of the Scherzo was buried in smooth, glassy articulation. The G major sonata was a  brilliant sprint.
I found so much more to like in the "Waldstein," particularly its virtuosically shimmering finale, that I wondered whether I had simply needed time to adjust to Mr. Pollini's sharply focused view. In the same way, new glasses can sometimes give you headaches. But the cascades of runs, trills and passage work in the "Waldstein" finale also better matched the Pollini style. His occasionally intrusive pedaling here worked magically, since the notes of the principal melody are meant to coalesce in a gorgeous smear.
The pianist forges ahead with further concerts on March 8, 17 and 23. His thoughts on the late sonatas, particularly Opus 111, are worth knowing. (It is a great enough achievement if a pianist gets a few sonatas exactly right.) And take note: This cycle coincides with a rare, marvelous exhibition of Beethoven manuscripts and memorabilia in the Rose Museum at Carnegie.  See the ear trumpet, the metronome, some surprisingly clear, elegant sketches. So much Beethoven is crammed in one small space that the effect is eerie.
MUSIC REVIEW
Jukka-Pekka Saraste, a 39-year-old conductor from Finland, is best known to American audiences for a series of thoughtfully shaped Sibelius symphony recordings he made for RCA. Two seasons ago, Mr. Saraste took over the directorship of the Toronto Symphony, and on Saturday evening he made his first  appearance with his ensemble at Carnegie Hall. From his specialty repertory, he  offered Sibelius's two shortest symphonies, the Sixth and the Seventh, as well as a piece from the mainstream repertory, the Beethoven Violin Concerto.
Mr. Saraste and his players left the impression that music-making is an easygoing, perhaps almost casual business in Toronto. Everything was neatly in place, and there was much to admire in the solidity of the brass playing, the clarity and centered intonation of the winds and the warmth of the string tone.  But in place of the supercharged, high-tension readings for which many American  and European orchestras strive, the Toronto players offered performances that were assured, comfortable and, most of all, relaxed.
There were moments, especially in the Beethoven, where a listener wanted the  voltage turned up slightly. But for the most part, Mr. Saraste's approach offered an interesting alternative to the increasingly faceless international standard. It was also an entirely appropriate approach to the two Sibelius works, each of which offers sweeping vistas that depend on luxurious string playing and a flexibility of tempo that allows the works to make their dramatic  points. The Seventh, in particular, benefited from this flexibility in Mr. Saraste's reading.
Frank Peter Zimmermann, the soloist in the Beethoven, seemed in full concord  with Mr. Saraste's low-key reading. His sound was light and tightly focused, and if one might have preferred a broader coloristic palette, Mr. Zimmermann's concentration on the songlike qualities of the line made a strong appeal, as did his use of the rarely heard Leopold Auer cadenzas.
ALLAN KOZINN
The Classic Strings Ensemble of Mount Vernon will play works by Haydn, Bach, Mozart and Mendelssohn next Saturday today at 3 P.M. in a Music, Wine and Cheese concert at the New Rochelle Public Library. The all-female sextet was founded in 1991 by its present director, Normearleasa Thomas-Jackson. A donation of $2 to the Library Music Review Committee is requested.
The Scottish percussionist Evelyn Glennie, who appeared at Avery Fisher Hall  in Manhattan a few weeks ago, will give her only New York region recital of the  season next Sunday at 3 P.M. at Purchase College, tackling more than 40 instruments in pursuit of "Rhythm Song," "Rebounds" and other works that have propelled her to international fame. The box office number is 251-6200.
To Marymount College in Tarrytown goes the honor of winding up Women's History Month in a blaze of "Lady Fingers," a celebration of female pianists and composers that finds nearly a dozen artists "performing in all styles from the virtuoso Romantics to avant-garde jazz." At 3:30 P.M. next Sunday, the composer Laura Kaminsky moderates a panel discussion on being a female artist. The ensuing concert at 4 features Ilana Vered, Patricia Waters, Mariko Sato, Camille Antoinette Budarz, Nina Sheldon, Lisa Moore, Amy Rubin and Evelyne Luest playing works by Ms. Kaminsky, Robin Berger, Amy Beach and Nurit Tilles along with works by Chopin, Milhaud and Liszt. For more details, call the college at 332-7438.
The Stein Hall Players perform works by Mozart and Prokofiev today at 3 P.M.  in a free recital at Concordia College in Bronxville.
Tonight at 8 the Festetics Quartet, made up of strings and a fortepiano, offers works by Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven to members of the Westchester Chamber Music Society. Tickets will be available at the door of Temple Emanu El  in Rye.
The Hudson Valley Music Club continues to entice top-notch ensembles to its matinee series at 54 Clinton Avenue in Dobbs Ferry. Tomorrow at 2 P.M., members  and friends greet the St. Lawrence String Quartet, playing quartets by Mozart and Schumann.
For reservations or details about other club activities, the number to call is 693-1489.
An unusual adventure in "Music Soundscapes" is the promise of Wednesday's 12:35 P.M. Noonday Getaway concert at Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains. Accompanied by the percussionist Orlando Fiol, David Lynch offers "an interlude  of original music from various cultures and places," singing and playing all manner of exotic instruments, among them flute, sitar, ocarina and erh-hu (a Chinese fiddle). Call 949-0384 for more information.
The Hungarian pianist Jeno Jando (pronounced YEN-nuh YAWN-doe) is visiting North America for a private recital for the Consulate General of Hungary and several concerts in Canada. His only public appearance in the United States is at the Hackley School, where his program at 8 P.M. Friday includes sonatas by Haydn and Beethoven, plus three works by Mr. Jando's countryman Franz Liszt. For reservations, call 631-0128, extension 362.
"We are dedicated to bringing the joy and excitement of the finest in professional opera to the region," said Franco Gratale, the founding artistic director of Westchester Hudson Opera Company, adding that the cast of Verdi's "Trovatore" is headed by two Metropolitan Opera soloists, Christine Weidinger and Richard Vernon, and Ludmilla Schemtschuk, gold medalist at the Tchaikovsky Competition in Moscow and currently a member of the Bolshoi Opera Company there.
Charles Rosekrans, music director, will be on the podium at Purchase College  next Saturday and Sunday at 8 P.M. and 3 P.M., respectively. Patrons may also attend a Celebrity Brunch late Sunday morning with the baritone Sherrill Milnes. For more details, including information about Opera Guild memberships, call 946-4555. Opera tickets may be ordered by calling the box office at 251-6200.
Turning to music in a lighter vein, Andre De Shields, who originated the title role in the Broadway hit "The Wiz," stars in a new musical about Louis Armstrong, with 8 P.M. performances Thursday through Saturday at the Emelin Theater, plus a 2 o'clock matinee next Saturday and a 3 o'clock matinee next Sunday. Call 698-0098 for reservations.
Thursday is also opening night in Elmsford, as everybody's favorite Gene Kelly movie, "Singing in the Rain," gets a stage production at the Westchester Broadway Theater. The run extends through mid-June; for show times and dates, call 592-2222.
Next Saturday night at 8, Jazz at the Music Hall in Tarrytown offers Joe Henderson's Double Rainbow Quartet in a tribute to the late Brazilian composer Antonio Carlos Jobim. Call 674-2005 for more details of these and future concerts sponsored by Jazz Forum Arts.
Friends of Bluegrass Music present the guitar and mandolin master Phil Rosenthal with the Stockwell Brothers, the New England-based bluegrass band, next Saturday at 8 P.M. at Whippoorwill Hall in Armonk. The number to call for tickets is 273-3598.
MUSIC
Debussy's "Danse" opens a program at 8 o'clock on Thursday evening by the New Haven Symphony in Woolsey Hall at Yale.
Thereafter, Thomas Stacy of the New York Philharmonic offers a performance of Ned Rorem's English Horn Concerto, then two principal players of the orchestra,  the cellist Steven Thomas and the violist Marvin Warshaw, play featured roles in Strauss's "Don Quixote" (292-6476).
The Fairfield Orchestra has the week off, but principal players of the ensemble will assemble at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich for an evening of chamber music, including Toru Takemitsu's "Toward the Sea," and with David Leisner as guest artist, Haydn's Guitar Quartet and Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco's  Quintet for Guitar and Strings (831-6020).
The American pianist William Wolfram is soloist with the Waterbury Symphony Saturday at 8:15, playing Rachmaninoff's First Piano Concerto. The group's music director Leif Bjaland will begin the evening conducting Paul Creston's Dance Overture; he'll close it with Tchaikovsky's "Pathetique" Symphony (574-4283).
In a program at 8:30 P.M. on Saturday the Stamford Symphony Pops offers "Travelin' Music" with a return of Michael Krajewski, who conducted the Pops last season (325-4466).
It'll be a busy orchestral weekend in New Haven, too: at 8 P.M. on Saturday,  Shinik Hahm leads the Yale Symphony in works by Berlioz, Debussy and Mahler (432-4140), and next Sunday at 3, the New York Philharmonic's music director, Kurt Masur, takes the Yale Philharmonia through Mendelssohn, Schumann and Strauss at a free open rehearsal in Woolsey Hall (432-4158).
Two mother-daughter teams perform in Hartford and Greenwich recitals and the  New World Chamber Ensemble displays "The Feminine Touch" in Millard Auditorium at the Hartt School of Music in West Hartford.
As a special feature of this afternoon's "Rampant Romanticism" program concert in the Chamber Music Plus series at the Bushnell in Hartford, the violinist Renee Jolles and her mother, the harpist Susan Jolles, are presenting  transcriptions of Fritz Kreisler's "Praeludium and Allegro" and Three Songs (Op. 40) by Amy Beach.
Harry Clark and Sanda Schuldmann will add Three Pieces for Cello and Piano by the New England composer Arthur Foote (246-6807).
At 8 P.M. on Saturday in the Greenwich Library, the pianist Yoshie Akimoto and her daughter, the cellist Allison Eldredge, are giving a recital to benefit  the Japan Society of Fairfield County. On the program are solo and duo works by  Bach, Liszt, Chopin, Bruch and Mendelssohn, plus Dvorak's "Songs My Mother Taught Me" (762-1141).
The New World Ensemble -- the violinist Anhared Stowe, the cellist Erick Dahlin and the pianist Margreet Francis -- has assembled Duos and Trios by Clara Schumann, Rebecca Clarke, Amy Beach, Fanny Mendelssohn and Ellen Taafe Zwilich.  The recital in West Hartford is also set for Saturday evening at 8.
Two additional works by female composers -- Cecile Chaminade and Katherine Hoover -- will be presented next Sunday afternoon at 2, when the flutist Carol Wincenc presides over a combined concert and master class in Wilde Hall.
For information about either of these Hartt School events, call 658-7909.
MUSIC
As Hanna's first love, Count Danilo, nephew of the King of Marsovia, the dashing tenor Michael Hayes was suitably headstrong and cocky. Occasionally, he  touched deeper into the character, suggesting that Danilo's womanizing was a cover for his crippling ambivalence about commitment.
For the most part, however, this production treats the work like some hopelessly dated confection of fetching melodies and inane comedy, with the famously wistful title waltz milked at every turn for sentiment. The operetta could be played for its satire and cynicism: the military leaders of this fictionalized Balkan state live poshly in Paris, scheming to salvage their country's treasury by getting the widow remarried to a Marsovian. But the English adaptation by the director Robert Johanson and the lyrics by Albert Evans are filled with updated quips ("Don't ask, don't tell") and inappropriate  crudities.
The wives of two Marsovian officials, played like cackling caricatures, throw themselves at the young Count. ("Is there anything I can do for you?" one of them asks, as she insinuatingly strokes his gleaming sword.)
The Act II ensemble, when the six main male characters sing of their frustration with women, was choreographed by Sharon Halley like some intentionally bad, high-kicking Rockettes routine. Act III is shifted from Hanna's palace to Maxim's, where the widow, absurdly, dances a comic can-can with the follies girls.
George S. Irving played the baron as an oafish stereotype. As his restless young wife, Patricia Johnson was charming though her singing was sometimes strident. As the eligible Parisian who illicitly pursues her, the tenor Carlo Scibelli sang handsomely, and his stiffness as an actor was almost a relief from the production's frantic jollity.
The orchestra under Alexander Sander gave a stylish performance, though this  was difficult to assess, given that the musicians and signers were discreetly amplified.
The production will be televised at 8 P.M. on Wednesday on "Live From Lincoln Center." With the arts losing government support across the country, this PBS series might be expected to present the finest America has to offer. This production at most is mindless fun.
MUSIC REVIEW
Mr. Lawrence played the toccata with grandeur. But the pressures of the occasion -- playing the world's most famous organ work as part of the world's largest organ recital -- seemed to rattle him some, for his playing was not faultless.
Giving a representative roster of guild organists a chance to participate seemed a greater priority than presenting a well-balanced program. The concert,  lasting nearly two hours without intermission, was more like a cavalcade. But there were some impressive performances of striking works: Gwendolyn Toth gave a rippling rendition of a spiraling galliard by Heinrich Scheidemann. Justin Bischof set the pews to trembling with a prelude from Symphonie No. 1 by the turn-of-the-century French composer Louis Vierne; it was the kind of organ piece where the sheer accumulation of sound is so enveloping you can't tell whether it is coming from within you or without you. Kiyo Watanabe tore through an unabashedly raucous contemporary toccata by Jean Guillou.
Mollie Nichols (in a vibrant performance of a Bach fantasy), Kyler Brown, Richard Erickson and Keith Toth were the other participants. In July in Manhattan, as part of its centennial plans, the American Guild of Organists is to serve as host for a national convention. Thousands of organists are expected  to attend. Practice time locally will be at a premium.
MUSIC REVIEW
Be-bop is an infinitely expanding musical language. Its harmonic rules, which allow for all sorts of chordal substitutions, value change and play. And rhythmically, it lets musicians experiment as much as they want, as long as they understand the system.
Like a small group of saxophonists of his generation, Jimmy Heath has used be-bop's promise to add significant harmonic, rhythmic and textural ideas to the music. Like Sonny Rollins and James Moody, two of Mr. Heath's peers on the instrument, he has done some serious work with harmony, and during his improvisations on Tuesday, he regularly pushed melodies and lines against the chords. His explorations changed a tune's color: the relationship between a single melody and the changing harmony brought tension to the performance.
Mr. Heath is a gentle player who rarely raises his voice. Backed by guitar,  bass and drums, he quietly let his gracefulness hide the more radically adventurous aspects of his improvising, using unruffled lines to glide through tunes. On several occasions he used classic be-bop figures, though in quotes, as if they were melodies instead of lines. And his improvisations were filled with  bits and pieces of melodies: "Invitation" and "Blues for Alice" ended up being riffs during several tunes.
By its end, the first set on Tuesday was churning with rhythms. On drums was  Mr. Heath's brother, Albert (Tootie) Heath, who plays with a gorgeous sense of time and tempo. He likes shuffles, and he drove the band as if it was playing a  dance; it made the music live.
Mr. Heath and his group are performing through tomorrow at the Vanguard, 178  Seventh Avenue, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village.
PETER WATROUS
There was much to admire in Anne-Marie McDermott's playing on Monday evening, but one immediately striking quality was the physicality of her relationship to  the piano. In the way she hovered over pensive sections and moved with the beat  during rhythmically complicated passages, her body language was that of a jazz pianist, and it suggested a sense of spontaneity and discovery rather than rote  repetition. Sight and sound were not at odds: Ms. McDermott brought a lively interpretive spirit, seemingly inexhaustible energy and an impressively flexible technique to the music at hand.
That flexibility was most valuable in the program's centerpiece, Schubert's Sonata in D (D. 850). This tour of Schubert's psyche hits extremes of almost Beethovenian storminess, bittersweet nostalgia and bright, innocuously folksy dance figures. Ms. McDermott moved easily through these competing currents, playing the grand chordal gestures and rumbling basses of the opening movement with power, and the delicate filigree of the later movements with pinpoint, crystalline clarity.
Ms. McDermott also gave an animated, hard-driven performance of Prokofiev's  Sonata No. 6 in A (Op. 82) in which she tempered the music's mechanistic aspects without rounding off its brash edges or losing any of its purely visceral appeal. She brought a measure of sparkle to Clementi's Sonata No. 6 in D (Op. 25), though not enough to make the work into more than pedestrian note-spinning. And she played Alfred Grunfeld's "Soiree de Vienne," a high-powered paraphrase of themes from Strauss's "Fledermaus," with both the lilt necessary to make the  waltzes dance, and the virtuosity demanded by the composer's Lisztian piano writing.
ALLAN KOZINN
Two songs into his set at S.O.B.'s on Monday night the singer Oscar D'Leon opened his improvisation with three or four syncopated percussive notes, forming a melody. It was so brash, and done with so much imagination that the trombonist Jimmy Bosch, sitting in with the band and standing next to Mr. D'Leon, started laughing out loud.
Mr. D'Leon is one of salsa's biggest stars, and he's regularly heard in stadiums and concert halls. He's the James Brown of salsa, with a tightly choreographed set and precise pop arrangements for his tunes. He plays bass at times, dancing with it; it's a show. But at S.O.B.'s he dropped the show and played for the audience, which was as interested in hearing the music as anything else.
So on one tune, Mr. D'Leon improvised against just the rhythm section, letting his phrases end on dissonant notes. He let several New York-based musicians sit in, including the percussionists Bobby Allende and Carlito Soto. And Mr. Bosch, one of the most exciting of the new salsa musicians, spent the set improvising with the band.
Much of the music was sculptured by Mr. D'Leon on the spot. He called riffs  and urged the horn section to play with more energy. He brought the horns up, and prodded Mr. Bosch to improvise against the din, then pulled his own trombonists up to the front of the stage. Mr. Bosch graciously dispatched them,  with a smile.
The show ended with a long medley of Cuban tunes, including "El Manisero" and "Castellano, Que Bueno Baile Usted" with Mr. D'Leon improvising hard lines with  a glee that suggested he was enjoying himself in the informal atmosphere of a club.
PETER WATROUS
Even the famous simplicity of the G Major Piano Concerto's slow movement (Mitsuko Uchida was the soloist on Thursday) bears Ravel's self-conscious touch. The long, exposed solo that finally melts into the orchestra's wind section is undeniably beautiful, but again we detect a composer making sure we know just how daring and original he has been.
Somehow, the concerto seems more real than its partner on this program. I also prefer it to the more portentous Left-Hand Concerto, a piece theatrical in  not the best sense of the word. I offer little logic for the preference; indeed, Ravel's "jazz" in the G Major's outer movements bears as much relevance to New Orleans and Kansas City as a Mozart "alla turca" does to Istanbul.  There is no  accounting for taste, this one included.
Ms. Uchida did not hit all the right notes in the difficult first movement, but she hit most of the important ones. Her success in the Adagio began with making us hear sustained notes in their long reaches from one subphrase to the next. Here the enemy is the piano's naturally decaying sound, and resolute finger-legato playing (the pedal won't do it) and clever shading of the accompaniments are the rectifiers. Ms. Uchida does both things well.
Mr. Previn conducted Ravel with reduced string sections, making agreeable chamber music out of both pieces. He also finds the balance between Ravel's calculated monotony of movement and his guarded, though no less sincere, expressiveness.
Korngold's F-Sharp Major Symphony was the other music. European critics say Hollywood ruined this great Austrian prodigy, but in truth, Korngold and the American cinema constitute a wedding preordained in heaven. The Scherzo is the center here, with its highly skillful manipulations of meter and phrase lengths. Elsewhere Korngold's love of the big punctuation mark and his care not to give audiences too much to listen to at one time are a movie maker's dream. Did Korngold create the style for cinematic melodrama? Did the movies make this symphony what it is? Our marriage partners are too close to separate.
A movement from Elgar's "Enigma Variations," played after intermission, remembered the death of a longtime Philharmonic trustee, Mrs. Arnold van Ameringen. The program repeats tonight and on Tuesday.
MUSIC REVIEW
So it was curious to follow this performance with a contemporary American homage to the "Liebeslieder-Walzer" that was so confused in intention and execution. Michael Barrett and Steven Blier, who direct the Festival of Song and serve as its pianists, commissioned 10 American composers to write one song each for a work titled "American Love Songs," also for vocal quartet and piano four hands. But the 10 songs, which received their premiere, demonstrated such differing attitudes and levels of skill that performing them together made a poor argument for the initial concept.
John Corigliano set the tone with his mocking "Liebeslied" -- the singers declaim "I love you" to one another with various degrees of insinuation and empty ardency. Davide Zannoni's "Blind Date With Alter Egos," though different in comic style, was similarly heavyhanded.
Some composers in their own ways tried to emulate Brahms's balancing of emotion and whimsy: Jeffrey Stock in his lilting setting of Whitman's homoerotic "We Two Boys Together Clinging," and James Sellars in his impish "Kissing Songs."
Songs that were affecting (Richard Danielpour's luxurious setting of Toni Morrison's "I Am No Prey") were lost among those that were overwrought (Bright Sheng's humorless take on E. E. Cummings's "May I Feel Said He"). Ned Rorem, two generations older than most of the other contributors, sounded like a master with his spare, literate, harmonically beguiling setting of Thom Gunn's "My Sad  Captains." Songs by Jane Komarov, Dalit Hadass Warshaw and John Musto rounded out the work. But in the future, freed from this ineffective grouping, all of these songs may fare better individually.
MUSIC REVIEW
Merkin Concert Hall
The Quintet of the Americas has concentrated on the music of the Western Hemisphere for 20 years but has never allowed its specialty to become too confining. A highlight of its Tuesday afternoon concert, in fact, was an elegantly turned account of Mozart's Quintet for Piano and Winds (K. 452). Mostly, though, the ensemble kept within its charter. For works from Argentina,  Venezuela, Cuba and the United States, the quintet was augmented by two musicians from Venezuela, Elena Abend, a pianist, and Jose Gregorio Sanchez, who played the cuatro, a miniature four-string guitar.
The United States was represented by Lowell Lieberman, whose "Fantasy on a Fugue of J. S. Bach" disguised its Bachian roots in a language that also touched upon the styles of Wagner and Philip Glass. From Argentina, there were two unusual works by Astor Piazzolla. In the rambunctious "Fuga y Misterio," from his opera "Maria de Buenos Aires," the ensemble played with an almost orchestral heft. The "Oblivion Milonga," from Piazzolla's soundtrack for a film version of  Pirandello's "Henry IV," showed the composer's more urbane, French-influenced side.
Mr. Sanchez joined the ensemble for a collection of lively Venezuelan dance pieces, including a Merengue by Pedro Oropeza Volcan, a waltz by Antonio Lauro and a Joropo by the ensemble's flutist, Marco Granados.  And matching the Liebermann work for inventiveness and wide-ranging eclecticism was the Cuban Baroque Suite by the novelist and composer Jose Bernardo, in which Baroque dance forms mingled with a Zapateo and a Rhumba.
The quintet, which has gone through several personnel changes over the years, is a fully polished and cohesive unit in its present configuration.
ALLAN KOZINN
The Great Southern Trendkill" starts with a perfect microcosm of Pantera: a  retching scream over a fast drumbeat followed by two guitar riffs, one in speed-metal Morse code, the second a power-trio boogie. Pantera's lyrics hate and distrust nearly everyone and everything, and to carry them, the band has honed music that's all impact. Behind Philip Anselmo's belligerent growl, the guitar and bass riff in unison, rarely bothering with chords, while the drums slam along. Of the 11 songs, 3 slow down and include melodies, but they sound like warmed-over Soundgarden; Pantera's strength is in its precision-timed surliness.
JON PARELES
Cecil Taylor opened a program of his music on Tuesday night with a solo improvisation. Unaccompanied piano solos are his strength: Mr. Taylor is one of the great improvisers in American music. But not all improvisations are equal, and this night he sounded discontinuous.
But his extraordinary control over the instrument and his melodic resources  were clear. Mr. Taylor, who is playing through tomorrow, clipped his notes short. He spread the parts of a chord over the keyboard, letting some notes ring and others die, muffled. He varied the weight of his sound, snapping some notes  and letting the rest grow softly. And at least during the first 15 minutes of his improvisation, he was quoting, from blues and boogie-woogie to the impressionists. There was a great feeling of sensuality: Mr. Taylor is in love with the sound of his instrument.
His solo improvisations are often episodic. He uses short bits of melodies or ideas, repeating them as a piece grows toward its inevitable and furious conclusion, the catharsis that often justifies his work. But in the first set the episodes sounded like strung-together mannerisms, and the conclusion never quite arrived. There were brilliant moments, melodic fragments of great beauty,  but the structure had no logic.
The first set opened with a group of several saxophonists, a trumpeter, two bassists and a few other strings. Though the musicians were reading music at times, the music mostly sounded freely improvised. It changed dynamic level, but that was about all, and when Mr. Taylor came out to play, the gravity of his sound made the group's set insignificant.
PETER WATROUS
Michael started out as an MTV-ready teen idol and pop star, then began to think of himself as a full-fledged artist. The Cure unexpectedly moved in the opposite direction. It emerged in the late 1970's as a snappy, self-questioning  post-punk band. But Smith gradually became a teen idol for the high-school-poet  set, who identified with his yelping voice and long-suffering songs.
On the new albums, both Michael, 32, and Smith, 37, are trying to move beyond their youthful images, as they consider mortality and the lessons of experience. "Older," the brooding title song of Michael's album, asks, "Don't you think I'm looking older?" as the singer decides to end "wasted days without affection." "Wild Mood Swings" begins with "Want," a slow-building dirge in which Smith whimpers, "I'll never really get more hope/ Or any more time," and it ends with "Bare," a breakup song in which he wonders, "Why does it hurt me like this to say that I've changed?/ To say that I've aged?"
Michael vaunts his maturity by singing gently; his new album is dedicated to  the bossa nova master Antonio Carlos Jobim. Since Michael never had the range or dynamics of the American singers he learned from, like Stevie Wonder, he's better off now as a crooner. He has toned down the funk beats and gospel-like choirs of his previous efforts, replacing them with undulating rhythms and purring keyboard-centered arrangements. With its leisurely tempos and insinuating hooks, "Older" resembles albums by come-on artists like R. Kelly and Bryan Ferry. But in most songs, Michael isn't trying to soothe anyone but himself.
Michael's resentment at Sony shows up in the easy-chugging but self-righteous "Star People"; stardom, he pouts, is "a dream with a nightmare stuck in the middle." Other songs that are ostensibly about crumbling romances could also refer to his career, like the sashaying, finger-snapping "Move On" ("Getting hard to find a song to play/ But, oh, I guess I got my reasons"). Yet whether Michael is singing about business or romance, he's on his own. (He also recorded most of the album by himself, playing keyboards, bass and percussion.)
Sometimes the woman is cheating on him or has left him, or is simply absent;  sometimes he's giving her a suave heave-ho. He does, briefly, notice other people: over the muted disco beat of "Fastlove," he turns into a sleazy Casanova, and in the poised, melancholy "You Have Been Loved," he empathizes with a woman mourning a dead son. But for most of "Older," Michael sinks into a  voluptuous solitude, where distant, jazzy horns or hovering synthetic strings only decorate his self-absorption.
The Cure's 14 new songs on "Wild Mood Swings" trace a full cycle: from yearning to giddy new love through a long, grim breakup. It could just as well be called "Seduced and Abandoned," as Smith finds that lust doesn't guarantee commitment. He lets himself be swept into pleasure in "The 13th," blurting, "It  feels good! Do it to me! Do it to me!" over a Latin-tinged beat. But the passion doesn't last; the women drift away, reunions go wrong, and even when he wants to hold on, all that's left are regrets and goodbyes.
"Wild Mood Swings" is also about another break: from the Cure's previous style -- a slow maelstrom of tolling electric guitars and ominous keyboards -- to music that's less enveloping. Although there's plenty of variety, from the "Strawberry Fields" undertow of "This Is a Lie" to the Neil Young distortion of  "Trap" to the jazzy waltz of "Gone!," the new Cure is defined by strummed acoustic guitars, drums played with brushes and auxiliary strings and horns.
Because so many Cure songs linger over two chords, the arrangements are crucial. And while Smith's lyrics distill lovers' most painful moments into monologues that ring true, the music hangs back, as if refusing to confirm his delirium; it seems more objective. For all the torments of heartbreak, the anguish doesn't seem so earthshaking as it was the last time, and all the times  before.
RECORDINGS VIEW
Mr. Cocker is part of the line of stylized English rockers that looks back to David Bowie. Unlike many of them, he has his own ideas and persona. He sings  like Mr. Bowie, in a breathy baritone that trembles and breaks, while Pulp's music combines Mr. Bowie's marches and anthems with the thumping pulse and octave-hopping synthesizers of 1970's disco and early-1980's Europop, like Laura Branigan's "Gloria." There's drama and release in the songs as they move from confiding verses to grand choruses to proud pop nonsense syllables, made for singing along.
Unlike Mr. Bowie, who presented himself as an alien and an aristocrat (at one point calling himself the "thin white duke"), Mr. Cocker is no social climber. His lyrics are full of the details of working-class English life: the wood-chip  walls, the cheap beds. Most often Mr. Cocker presents himself as a lonely misfit, an outsider longing for a certain girl, or a sympathetic voyeur. Pulp's set started with "I Spy," which declares, "A giant walks among you, seeing through your petty lives." It's no wonder he has such a watchful expression when he's in the spotlight himself.
On the band's most recent album, "Different Class," Pulp makes a breakthrough by combining its long-running romantic frustration with overt class resentment;  the songs seesaw between envy and regular-guy pride. In "Common People," a hit single in England, the singer is picked up by a rich girl who wants to "do whatever common people do." With growing resentment but within a triumphant melody, he tells her, "You'll never fail like common people, you'll never watch  your life slide out of view."
Clearly according to plan, Mr. Cocker dropped his cool just twice during the  set. His face contorted and his voice rose when he sang "Common People" and the  final encore, "Mis-Shapes," with lyrics about people who have had enough of intolerant small towns: "We want the things you won't allow us." In those songs, Mr. Cocker's solitary character finds his community; he may be desperate, but he's no longer alone.
Bottom Line
Bit by bit, Rosanne Cash has been stripping her songs down to essentials. Although as Johnny Cash's daughter she has a prime country pedigree, the formulas of Nashville songwriting constricted her. She held on to concise melodies and verse-chorus-bridge structures, but moved closer to 1960's folk-rock and 1970's confessional songs. And where she used to try for a torchy  twang, she has realized she sounds truer when she sings gently. On Wednesday night, she held her band to a whisper for most of the set.
Ms. Cash drew on her superb new album, "10 Song Demo" (Capitol), and her 1993 album, "The Wheel" (Columbia). She also read extracts from her book of short stories, "Bodies of Water" (Hyperion, 1996), and sang "Wouldn't It Be Loverly?" as a pensive ballad, a credo of simplicity.
Using plain, mostly one-syllable words, she turned basic sentiments -- "If you see who I really am will you still want to stay?" -- into archetypal pleas,  or she pondered recurring images of angels and roses. There was melancholy in the songs, but strength, too. By revealing her vulnerability with such care, Ms. Cash pushed beyond it.
JON PARELES
But beyond doing her parental bit for her children's school, Mrs. Sweet -- and please call her Mrs., which she has been for 19 years -- is on a crusade. "I want to do everything I can to promote music here," she said in an interview. "Music and art in Europe are still as important as math and science."
On a sticky afternoon under a boiling sun. she again turns away from an audience to acknowledge a chorus -- the Met's -- at the "Aida" rehearsal in Central Park. With no makeup, in a schoolgirlish black skirt and sweater and white blouse, she looks oddly young.
There is no doubt of her vocal command in the stirring triumphal procession ensemble. Hands on hips, she takes a breath, sucks up everyone else's air and lets the tone go. Other singers, though miked for this concert version, become part of a lovely background tapestry. Her whole front rises. If this is the engine that powers her vocalism, the rest of the cast should consider going out for malteds.
Discussing mixed reviews of recent performances here -- and remarks about her lack of pianissimo and her ample diva figure -- Mrs. Sweet is disarmingly frank, showing puzzlement but no rancor. "It depends what size you are when you train your voice," she explained. "I've been a big woman all my life. People with big  voices tend to be bigger. We're a misunderstood breed. The big voice today is extremely misunderstood."
Focusing on voice size rather than body shape, she continued: "In the time of the Callases and Milanovs, the big voice was important. Then came the period of  the smaller voice -- with exception of Leontyne, of course."
In her own school days in upstate New York, Mrs. Sweet was the chorus accompanist. Later, as a singer, she found her first success in Germany, where her voice type was lyric spinto, an Italian name for the repertory that includes Elisabeth in "Tannhauser," Leonora in "Il Trovatore" and Aida, a role in which she says her voice is happier. European reviews in the last two years single out her "sumptuous richness of tone," "resourceful voice" and "expressive sense of phrasing."
"I am probably a real Verdi soprano," she said. "Volume, piano, the bottom part of the voice, the top part, flexibility -- that's what I've been given. Aida has been given to lighter voices because of TV and video. They look the part, but they don't sing the part."
So what's the Mozart: spinto? Dramatic? "Most of the time they use a real light voice," she said. "I have never understood that. I can't sing the Mozart Requiem like a soubrette. My piano is more substantial."
Her favorite moment in "Aida," surprisingly for one who has a field day with  solo arias, is the second-act duet with the princess Amneris, when Amneris tricks the slave Aida into revealing her love for the commander Radames, Amneris's betrothed.
But she likes it for soloistic reasons, speaking of her voice as if it were a discrete entity: "It shows what I can do, top to bottom, pianos and fortes. I love being able to go from a big thing and bring the voice down to nothing. It's hard for people to understand that a voice as big as mine can be scaled down to  become very small. Verdi knew what he was doing."
T HE operas are presented in concert (with no surtitles) in the portable Carlos Moseley Music Pavilion, a portable band shell. Separate controls monitor  mikes and mix sound, even adding reverberation. Paul Plishka, as Ramfis the priest, calls Radames to condemn him to death with a wonderful hollow echo, as if coming from an inner temple chamber.
Mr. Plishka, who studied at Montclair State College and made his debut with the Paterson Lyric Opera, is firm friends with Mrs. Sweet. She calls him "one of these kind, honest people you can just curl up with, emotionally." He, too, was  a soloist in the Princeton high school concert, at her invitation.
Another man she counts on is her husband, John, a Presbyterian minister; they have never had a nanny for their three children. "I never canceled when my children were sick," Mrs. Sweet said. "My husband took over, then I got sick. You just do what you have to do."
She is equally philosophical about her musical life. "All I know is that I love to sing," she said. "I can't try to please everybody, but maybe there's somebody down the road that they do love. If I can bring joy, if they love it, I'm thrilled."
MET IN THE PARKS
'Aida' Verdi's opera, conducted by Christian Badea. Tuesday at Brookdale Park, Montclair (rain date Thursday); Friday at Buccleuch Park, New Brunswick (rain date next Sunday).
'Turandot' Puccini's opera, conducted by Nello Santi. Wednesday at Brookdale Park, Montclair (rain date Thursday); Saturday at Cooper River Park, Pennsauken (rain  date next Sunday).
All performances in concert at 8 P.M. Free. Information: (212) 362-6000.
MUSIC
Nacao Zumbi merges a rock band and a percussion group. It gets its booming beat from three surdos, drums that are made to play maracatu but easily endure power chords. Rapping, shouting and singing, Chico Science made his voice raspy  or huskily sincere, and he commanded the stage, moving with a hip-hopper's slouch or the pumping elbows and fast footwork of traditional dances.  The band  played its last songs in a downpour, and its rumbling surdos and blaring guitar  seemed to summon thunder and lightning. Because the band shell has a steel structure, the set was cut short.
Mundo Livre S.A. is led by Zero Quatro, whose songs have been recorded by Chico Science. On Saturday, Zero Quatro arrived in a hat with shiny tubes pointing all over, like aluminum dreadlocks. Mundo Livre flaunted variety: hard  rock, funk, reggae and samba. But its core is wiry new-wave rock gone Brazilian; through most of the set Zero Quatro played cavaquinho, the miniature  samba guitar. He has a scrawny, pugnacious voice, and his songs were about lust, frustration and politics; one song praised the Mexican rebel Marcos as a cyberpunk. The band was scrappy and engaging, ambitious yet without pretensions.
Bando do Pifanos, from the village of Caruaru, is a family band that is now in its second generation. With three drums, cymbals and two wooden flutes in harmony, its forro tunes sounded akin to Andean music but more swinging. As its  set ended, the group showed the swaggering march that goes with the music.
POP REVIEW
Then Mr. Hancock appeared with his band, including Craig Handy on saxophones, Dave Holland on bass and Gene Jackson on drums. It is a bad sign when a plastic sound screen has been placed between the drummer and the band, even worse when it is in a place not meant for drums like Carnegie Hall. It means the drummer is ready to destroy a performance, and Mr. Jackson did his best, playing with a rock insensitivity to place and music.
Mr. Hancock performed more pleasantries, occasionally making them percussive  pleasantries. And out the audience went, finding solace in the relative tranquillity of the city's streets.
JAZZ REVIEW
Mr. Simmons, another Californian, is a disciple of Ornette Coleman. His set, at the Tap Room, was rife with blues feeling, even through he often played music with no harmonic background. Sometimes he honked and squealed, and other times his lines reflected the profound influence Charlie Parker had on Mr. Coleman. But the blues, in his intonation and his riffing, were always there.
Mr. Hill is a mysterious figure, showing up occasionally and then dropping out of sight. But over the last year he's been playing New York fairly often. For this performance, back in the main space, he played his usual vague, elliptical music. He started out several tunes with a dash of a chord, just a bit of color, then worked it for 15 minutes, turning over the few notes, peering into their particular darkness or shaking them out a bit. The tempos never moved into high gear; it was meditative music.
Mr. Hill was working with a quiet form of improvisation, one that had its basis in his own brand of harmony. For all its gauzy wash, the music held together.
JAZZ REVIEW
The deployment here, though impressive to behold, was more sensible: the 140-member Voices of Ascension Chorus was joined by the Young Singers of Pennsylvania, a children's choir of 150 directed by Joseph Ohrt. The choristers  were accompanied by a freelance orchestra with Mark Kruczek at the cathedral organ and Dennis Keene taking charge from the podium.
Though less than Berlioz's ideal, the assembled forces flooded the reverberant space with enveloping masses of sound. The only drawback was the placement of the instruments. Berlioz wanted the organ and orchestra on opposite sides of the cathedral so he could engage them in a competitive musical dialogue. "The Pope converses with the Emperor," as he put it.
Indeed, the opening of the work exploits this antiphonal idea: a series of sustained harmonic blasts from, alternately, the brassy full orchestra and the pealing organ, following by dramatic silences during which the sounds linger hauntingly. This effect did not work here, where the organ pipes and instruments were in the same general area near the central rotunda. But in general, the performance was compelling and the piece is always an experience.
Hearing this work live makes clear why Philip Glass cites Berlioz as an influence. As in Glass's music, the harmonic rhythmic (the rate at which the harmonies change) is slow. Whole passages of repetitive musical figures sit atop a sustained pedal tone or interval, as in the inexorable "Judex crederis." Mr. Keene paced the music tellingly and kept the forces together, which is about all one can do with this hourlong work. Careful balancing of textures, for example,  would be pointless. Berlioz intentionally layered disparate elements -- lines of counterpoint, churning bass figures, bittersweet harmonies, hymnal writing for chorus -- into the same texture. Impact, not clarity, is called for. John Aler was the rich-voiced tenor soloist in the "Te ergo quaesumus" prayer.
MUSIC REVIEW
It is always nice to see chamber players share billing equally even if, as is so often the case, the gesture represents vague condescension on the part of the real star toward a hard-working, fairly anonymous pianist. In this case, the pianist was the more impressive performer.
Though it was easy enough to admire much of what Mr. Kanaseki was doing with his violin on Wednesday evening, it was not always easy to warm to it.
He seemed not quite in focus technically or mentally for the substantial opening number, Beethoven's Violin Sonata No. 2, playing with edgy tone and sometimes insecure bowing and intonation. He was even less prepared for the deeper virtuosic waters of Prokofiev's Sonata No. 2.
His technical command improved in the second half of the program, in the Franck Sonata and two newer works: Kiyoto Fujiwara's "Long Thoughts" No. 3, which seemed just long enough for its lyrical utterance, and Tokie Maruyama's "Poem," a diffuse, angular exercise that did indeed drag on too long.
The Maruyama had Mr. Kakeya plucking about inside the piano to little effect. But left to more conventional devices at the keyboard, he proved a fluent technician. Where the violinist played disconnected phrases, Mr. Kakeya carried the line through with greater animation and wide-ranging dynamics.
It's a shame that abundant talent and earnest effort don't, of themselves, translate into musical poetry or excitement.
JAMES R. OESTREICH
IN PERFORMANCE
By a twist of tradition, Sibelius's seven symphonies have arranged themselves in a symmetry of preference with American audiences: while the First, Second and Fifth are well loved, the Third, Sixth and Seventh are barely known; the Fourth hovers in perennial limbo, widely performed but too dark to be widely embraced.
One might expect a pairing of the popular Second and the neglected Sixth to shed light on the larger esthetic, or even psychological, issues separating the  Sibelius that has caught on from the Sibelius that hasn't. But no such clarification befalls here. Lorin Maazel's willfully, iconoclastically slow tempos translate the heroic D major Second into tragic utterance befitting, say, incidental music for "Macbeth." The Pittsburgh Symphony deserves all credit for  the fine tension with which it sustains Mr. Maazel's long-drawn lines.
Paradoxically, it is the Sixth Symphony, in D minor, that is usually characterized as tragic, though in Mr. Maazel's airy phrasing and quicksilver gestures one finds more of lyric wistfulness than anything touching tragedy. Here, as in the Second, the Pittsburgh strings and woodwinds particularly distinguish themselves.
WAGNER: OVERTURES, PRELUDES Chicago Symphony conducted by Daniel Barenboim. Teldec 4509-99595-2; CD.
On the surface, this is but another in a series of Wagnerian potpourris that  stretch back through generations of recording history. It's the kind of thing you casually pass by in a CD bin. But this one should not be passed over lightly; it is, on all counts, a winner.
Daniel Barenboim, who has earned his Wagnerian stripes at Bayreuth, approaches these ultrafamiliar curtain-raisers and interludes -- from "The Flying Dutchman," "Tannhauser," "Lohengrin," "Die Meistersinger" and "Tristan und Isolde" -- with a seriousness that is not so typical. What comes across is a deep respect for the music, along with a deep love. These eloquent, unhurried performances evoke a night at the opera rather than an afternoon in the recording studio.
But there is nothing meek or pious in Mr. Barenboim's Wagner. It is rich in color, powerful in spirit, riveting in its concision. As for the playing, with the exception of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, there may not be another American ensemble that could match the Chicagoans' all-around luster; and Mr. Barenboim marshals those forces with meticulous care.
Teldec's luminous sound provides this gem with a worthy setting.
LAWRENCE B. JOHNSON
In a midnight set on Monday, there wasn't a dull soloist in Mr. Lindner's young band. Playing "Hope," a ballad by another pianist, James Hurt, two members of the front line whose sensibilities have rubbed off on each other -- Myron Walden, alto saxophonist, and Greg Tardy, tenor saxophonist -- took turns developing short phrases into wailing crescendos originating from the bottom of  the chest. At other moments in the set, Kenny Rampton's trumpet solos alternated lancing shouts and sleek melodic improvising, and Omer Avital's thumping, knocking bass technique gave the rhythm section a rude kick.
Mr. Lindner was always instigating hotter rhythms. His time lies as far behind the beat as possible, and he solos emphatically, with a natural sense of  holding an audience: he makes his piano mumble, letting his chords recede and decay, then hammers out repeated figures like a conga player, sparking the group higher.  The band plays every Monday from 10 P.M. to 2 A.M. at Smalls, 183 West  10th Street, Greenwich Village.
BEN RATLIFF
JAZZ REVIEW
Phantasm, a viol consort that brings together musicians from the Amsterdam Baroque Orchestra, Fretwork and other groups, was formed in London two years ago. The group has just made its first recording, a traversal of the Purcell Fantasias, several of which were included in its New York debut program at the Frick Collection on Tuesday afternoon.
The first half of the program was devoted to pieces by Gibbons and Byrd, works rich not only in the exquisitely melancholy character that pervades the music of the English Renaissance, but also in the playful virtuosity that keeps the music from seeming unremittingly dour. Byrd's ''In Nomine'' settings, for example, have a graceful, meditative quality from which a sense of mortality is never very distant. Yet their carefully balanced chordal devotions give way to fleet, intricate counterpoint.
Gibbons and Purcell retained this sense of structure to varying degrees. In Fantasias Nos. 7 and 11, for four viols, Purcell offers a magnified, slightly more brightly colored road map of the path from sublime intensity to virtuosic elaboration. Gibbons, by contrast, shortened the journey from darkness to light, diving quickly into energetic variations.
There was, at times, a comfortably homespun quality about the Phantasm performance. One had a sense that the works had not been polished to death, but instead were played with an exploratory sense, as if they were being discovered afresh.
Intonation occasionally went astray, and there were moments when the performances could have generated brighter sparks. Yet in their best moments, the players produced a sound of great beauty. Individual lines were clear and distinct, and when a line sang out above the others, the players helped it with a subtle touch of vibrato, an effect not often heard at viol concerts.
The players in Phantasm are Laurence Dreyfus, Wendy Gillespie, Jonathan Manson, Markku Luolajan-Mikkola and Martha McGaughey.
MUSIC REVIEW
Presenting these particular works on the same program was not an ideal way to showcase their individual qualities, for all four shared a rather post-modern style. The program began with Variations for Flute and Orchestra, by Glen Cortese, also the evening's conductor.
The music is steeped in the language of Barber and Copland. There are attractive stacked-up harmonies, wistfully soft melodic lines for solo flute, a modal melancholic hymn, restless passages of flute recitative. It is nicely wrought but familiar-sounding. John Wion played the solo part with plaintive tone and elegance. Mr. Cortese drew sonorous playing from members of the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra.
A new work for two flutists and orchestra by the prolific William Thomas McKinley is playfully titled ''Goldberg Variations II'' -- a joint homage to one of the soloists, the esteemed Bernard Goldberg, and to Bach's masterpiece of the same title, which is quoted toward the end. Both Mr. Goldberg and his co-soloist, Grzegorz Olkiewicz, must alternate among flute, alto flute and piccolo, and the inventive, coloristic writing for all three instruments in various combinations is the work's most striking achievement.
Though Mr. McKinley has a tendency to stretch thin his elemental musical materials, the music is accessible and mostly effective, especially a slinky waltzlike section with crunchy clashes of notes between the flutes in duet, and a jittery march with piping piccolos that recalls the patriotic music of the American Federalist era.
Augusta Read Thomas's ''Eclipse Musings'' for solo flute (Bonita Boyd), solo guitar (Nicholas Goluses) and orchestra was a rhapsodic, post-modern meditation, interrupted with percolating passages for fluttering flute and zigzagging guitar, and a driving episode in which a three-note rhythmic riff keeps dislodging the four-squared metrical pattern. The soloists, particularly the radiant-toned Ms. Boyd, played beautifully.
Lowell Liebermann's Piccolo Concerto is unabashedly romantic. There are soaring string melodies that Mascagni would have been proud to have composed, and angelic piccolo melodies caressed by arpeggios in the piano and harp. The Presto finale, a wan evocation of Prokofiev in his clatteringly sarcastic mode, quotes Beethoven's ''Eroica'' Symphony, and also the main theme (turned major) of Mozart's G minor Symphony.
Jan Gippo played the solo part with command, but it was all rather trivial. Still, the conventioneers, recognizing a sure-fire crowd-pleaser, gave the performance a cheering standing ovation.
MUSIC REVIEW
Were they shirtless? Sure. Mr. Jones emerged at the beginning swaddled in a double-breasted vinyl jacket with the collar up, but by the end of the show you could read the tattoo on his back. Were they dissipated? No, but in sobriety they've found other modes of decadence.
Cynical and approaching middle age, they don't sing about neuroses or being outsiders. Most songs are severely backhanded salutes to women, like ''Nasty Ho'' (''you saved my soul'' is the only complimentary line in a song that's otherwise about a cash transaction) and ''Angelina,'' with its casual references to the subject's plastic surgery. (Mr. Jones, introducing the latter: ''This song's about a bimbo who drives around L.A. in a pink Corvette.'') These men are worthy of a Joan Didion essay.
Also on the bill was Fluffy, a young all-woman quartet from London who are about to release a CD of their own. Their proto-punk songs are full of rage against thoughtless men and against unashamed narratives of drunkenness: in ''Black Eye,'' a song about an abusive relationship, the singer Amanda Rootes howled,  ''Gonna leave you/when I get the strength to.''
Fluffy could be the uncensored conscience of Angelina, screaming back at crude playboys like the Neurotic Outsiders. But the group doesn't come off calculated for a media age hungry for teen-girl rebellion; there were hints in Ms. Rootes's scratchy imprecations of a genuine excitement to be making music.  MUSIC REVIEW
The three played mostly standards, including ''Old Devil Moon'' and a couple of themes on ''I Got Rhythm.'' The forms were flexible, and tunes opened up into wide vamps, sending the soloists into exploratory spasms in which quotes and riffs and melodies set up communication among the musicians.
But for every open space there was plenty of harmonic structure. Both Mr. Locke and Mr. Cables rampaged through chord sequences, like Pac-Men on a quest for the next yellow dot of harmony. They're both virtuosos who reveled in the swoop of a hundred notes, not the spareness of melody.
JAZZ REVIEW
If Saturday night's concert was any indication, however, Mr. Bowie has rediscovered a way to reconcile his creativity with accessibility. The two-hour concert, which far outshone his recent arena tour with Nine Inch Nails, was a way for him to take a break from working on his new album, ''Earthling,'' scheduled to come out early next year. The songs from that album were among the highlights of the show. One of the cutting-edge styles Mr. Bowie has latched onto is jungle or drum-and-bass, an English sound in keeping with Mr. Bowie's love of cut-and-paste because it does just that to break-beat dance records.
In the epic ''Little Wonder,'' the drummer Zachary Alford played along with frenetic jungle beats, pausing occasionally for Reeves Gabrels to fill in the breaks with moody guitar riffs. More important, the vocals and sung melodies were emphasized in ''Little Wonder'' as well as in the other new songs the band performed: ''Baby Universal'' (a remake of a song by Mr. Bowie's band Tin Machine) and ''Seven Years in Tibet'' (featuring a trip-hop introduction and Mr. Bowie on guitar). To the consternation of many fans, Mr. Bowie's voice has been played down on his recent albums, most likely a result of the conception that the only route to innovation in music is through the technology of instruments.
Although Mr. Bowie pledged six years ago never to perform his fans' favorite hits again, he sprinkled a good number of older songs into the show. This didn't mean compromising, though. ''Look Back in Anger'' (which opened the show), ''Moonage Daydream,'' ''Heroes,'' ''Man Who Sold the World'' and ''Aladdin Sane'' were rearranged, performed as an arty fusion of progressive rock and electro-funk in the style of his most recent album, ''Outside.'' In addition, Mr. Bowie performed enticing versions of ''Under Pressure,'' his 1981 collaboration with Queen; ''All the Young Dudes,'' his song made famous by Mott the Hoople, and the Velvet Underground's ''White Light/ White Heat.''
Through it all, Mr. Bowie remained characteristically poised and self-aware. After his performance of ''Little Wonder'' was enthusiastically received, he smiled and told the audience: ''Thank you. I thought you'd like that.'' He spoke as if every audience reaction was predictable and the last decade of his career had been a game of chess that he had strategized far in advance.
POP REVIEW
In Merchant-Ivory films, music is often depicted as a liberation from the repressions and social charades that bear down on most characters; it provides a secret and dangerous window into one's true passions. ''If Miss Honeychurch ever takes to live as she plays, it will be very exciting, both for us and for her,'' Simon Callow tells Helena Bonham Carter after hearing her passionate performance of a Beethoven sonata in ''A Room With a View.'' Mr. Robbins's lush, mannered scores, however, often reflect the repression more than the liberation.
Classical music plays an important role in many of the duo's films. (They often have musically untrained actors taught to perform complex compositions.) But Mr. Robbins's own music usually consists of ornamental pieces, inspired by the periods in which the films are set, to capture the ambiance, with grandiose sweeps of the strings for sumptuous aerial shots or decorous pastoral themes for walks in nature.
The highlights on Tuesday were the scores, like ''In Custody'' by Zakir Hussain and Sultan Khan, that paired the Orchestra of St. Luke's, conducted by Harry Rabinowitz, with Indian light-classical music, nicely illustrating the cross-cultural themes that define much of Mr. Merchant and Mr. Ivory's lives and work. The reboant thump of the kettledrum was matched with the nimble tabla-drum rhythms of Mr. Hussain; the airy bansuri flute melodies of Hariprasad Chaurasia were echoed by the orchestra's string section.
The two-and-a-half hour concert had more subplots than most Merchant-Ivory films. In addition to being a tribute to the team, a showcase for Mr. Robbins' music and a chance to hear film stars read from the novels that inspired films in which they starred, the concert was also a benefit for the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
The audience's heartstrings were tugged in all directions, as Mr. Reeve turned in a humorous and dramatic reading of ''The Bostonians'' from his wheelchair; the actress and singer Nell Carter raised spirits with the gospel song ''Will the Circle Be Unbroken,'' from the forthcoming film ''The Proprietor,'' and the soprano Barbara Hendricks followed a Puccini aria with a version of the pop song ''Circle of Life,'' dedicated to those infected with H.I.V.
MUSIC REVIEW
The material is divided evenly between lyrics Hammerstein wrote with the composer Richard Rodgers and those he wrote with Jerome Kern, with an additional Sigmund Romberg collaboration. The songs allow Ms. Cook to be playful (''Surrey With the Fringe on Top''), dramatic (''Mister Snow''), sexy (''I Won't Dance'') and swinging (''Lover, Come Back to Me'').
But the heart of the show, which runs through Oct. 12, is four Jerome Kern collaborations -- ''Don't Ever Leave Me,'' ''All the Things You Are,'' ''Can't Help Lovin' That Man'' and ''Bill'' -- that may be the last  word in eloquent simplicity among modern theater songs. At Saturday's early show, Ms. Cook gave herself completely to these musical valentines. Her wistful, beautifully measured performances found a perfect empathy with the songs and their credo of tenacious romantic faith.
Ms. Cook is accompanied by her longtime musical director and pianist, Wally Harper, and by John Beal on bass.
CABARET REVIEW
''From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah,'' a collection of live Nirvana recordings that was in the planning stages before Cobain's death, shows another side: Cobain as a punk rocker, blood-curdling screamer and noise-guitar hero. If ''Unplugged'' was a call for help, ''Wiskah'' is a call to riot. Think of it as Nirvana Unpolished, an album that will separate the punks from the posers.
The CD begins with a hoarse, agonized yell, the kind that hurts one's vocal cords just to listen to. From there, the 17-song album skips through Nirvana's career from 1989 (two years after the band formed) to the group's last American shows in Seattle. Krist Novoselic, Nirvana's bassist, provides liner notes, setting the performances in context but providing no real insight.
Live, the studio sheen of Nirvana's major-label albums was replaced by fuzz, feedback and a tendency to punctuate each song with a violent, instrument-splintering ending. Except for the slow lament of ''Heart-Shaped Box,'' ''Wishkah'' is one long wallop, with even normally sedate numbers like ''Polly'' speeded up, shouted and laced with noise.
Though fans who don't already own scores of Nirvana bootlegs will be disappointed to find no rare or unreleased songs on the album, there are early versions of numbers like ''Polly'' and ''Tourette's.'' Some songs, like ''Aneurysm,'' are catchier and more exciting than their studio counterparts; some, like ''Sliver,'' are far sloppier and goofier; and others, like ''Smells Like Teen Spirit,'' are pretty much the same. In his suicide note, Cobain wrote of losing the excitement of performing. But on ''Wishkah,'' even when a lack of enthusiasm or focus is evident in his voice and playing, the performances are still exciting.
NEIL STRAUSS
POP/JAZZ
These programs, each presenting one of Brahms's four symphonies, one of his four concertos and a Hungarian Dance as encore, were all the more fascinating since Karajan liked to bring Brahms symphonies to New York, sometimes in a similar clean sweep. What has happened, such close comparison shows, is not that the current playing has exactly reverted to the quality and style of Karajan's heyday.
True, some astonishingly rich and creamy legato playing from the strings suggested as much at times. But under Karajan, the opening of Brahms's First Symphony, though highly dramatic, tended to be a plush, velvety, unified fabric. Here, on Saturday evening, it was tweedier, multifarious stuff, teeming with individual colors and voices yet smooth, dense and strong.
Karajan might have blanched, too, at some of the wrong notes and bobbled entries, which were by no means infrequent. But they were the inevitable byproducts of risks being taken by players however consummately skilled, a part of the overall exuberance of the performances.
Indeed, Mr. Abbado seems to have picked up the Karajan thread from the later years, when the imperious master was finally relenting, or fading, a bit in his control. Karajan's last decade or so produced some of his finest performances and recordings, complete with flaws treasurable for the gut-level engagement they represented. Listen, for example, to the finale of his 1978 recording of the Brahms Second Symphony or to the first movement of his 1982 version of the Mahler Ninth, both on Deutsche Grammophon.
In the way he marshals this excitement, however, Mr. Abbado seems to have attached to something more primal in the orchestra, going back at least to Karajan's immediate predecessor, Wilhelm Furtwangler, who led it almost continuously from 1922 to his death in 1954. To one who knows Furtwangler's work only from recordings, the analogy suggested itself in the Third Symphony on Monday as it had in the Second on Thursday, in a concert already reported on in these pages.
In the opening movement of each work, structural agitation and visceral excitement were joined at the hip; the harmonic adventure of the development section seemed incidental to an emotional one. Mr. Abbado observed the repeat of the exposition in each case, and that expanse proved crucial to generate the energy that swept headlong into the development, dissipating only in stages; the singular statement of the recapitulation pushed into the coda with proportionately less steam.
But through all such reminders of maestros past, Mr. Abbado gave the clear impression that this was not Karajan's or Furtwangler's Berlin Philharmonic, let alone a rootless one, but his. In a manner of speaking, that is, for these are strong-minded modern musicians, whose cooperation must be elicited rather than forced.
The needed trust now seems mutual. Through long familiarity, Mr. Abbado has come to realize the chances he can take with such a formidable ensemble and the advantages to be gained from letting the players take liberties in solo passages. And the orchestra, which has always worn its physical and psychic involvement, or lack of same, on its sleeve, is rewarding him with a kind of playing most conductors can only dream of.
It was a kind of playing, in fact, that the star concerto soloists were hard put to match. Daniel Barenboim did so on Monday in brilliant style, in a big, brawny account of the First Piano Concerto. Maxim Vengerov, a violinist, and Clemens Hagen, a cellist, contributed to a fine, more elegant reading of the Double Concerto on Sunday. (Peter Serkin's highly individual treatment of the Second Piano Concerto on Thursday was reviewed previously.)
Nothing so kind can be said of Itzhak Perlman's performance of the Violin Concerto on Saturday, with its emaciated and flagging tone. The frequent mistunings became almost painful in the double- and triple-stops of the cadenza, and Mr. Perlman made only passing stabs at some of the trickier passage work.
For whatever reason, Mr. Perlman's playing has fallen off alarmingly of late. It is surely no pleasure to have to report that a soloist of such stature served up the only real sour notes in these four evenings of spectacular music-making.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
Columbia Records is about to release a boxed set, ''In My Lifetime,'' that covers the three decades of Mr. Diamond's career. He got started as a staff songwriter in the Brill Building, celebrating young lust in songs like ''Cherry, Cherry.'' But there was always a sullen, wounded side to Mr. Diamond's songs, from ''Solitary Man'' in 1966 and ''Girl, You'll Be a Woman Soon'' in 1967 to ''Can Anybody Hear Me'' from his 1996 album, ''Tennessee Moon'' (Columbia). Since the late 1960's, when Mr. Diamond's songs began to incorporate rolling gospel riffs, he has also had a strain of high-flown philosophical hokum.
Mr. Diamond seems fond of the semi-coherent mutterings and basic riffs of songs like ''Crunchy Granola Suite'' and ''In My Lifetime.'' But the audience was waiting for the mawkish melodrama of ''You Don't Bring Me Flowers'' and the chest-puffing, revival-meeting crescendos of Mr. Diamond's hits from 1969-70, like ''Holly Holy'' and ''Sweet Caroline.'' In those songs he was a pop artisan who deftly conflated love, lust, ascending melodies and a semblance of redemption.
POP REVIEW
The Postal Service takes its activities seriously, and its stamps as well. In the 1970's, it began devising a policy whereby the little squares and rectangles you and I lick daily would for a moment remind us who we are in this country. Now it is classical music's turn, and two sheets to be released to the public next year will bear the pictures of composers, conductors and singers. The composers are all Americans; the foreigners among the others might as well have been, considering all the time they spent here.
Officials have reasonably optimistic hopes for their new high-toned offerings but have no illusions that Rosa Ponselle or Ferde Grofe will approach the spectacular performance of the Elvis Presley stamp of 1993. The 500 million printed indicate that the king of rock-and-roll retains a certain institutional authority in the realm of philately as well.
These are not the first music stamps the Postal Service has given us. Elvis Presley was only part of a 29-cent lineup that went from Bill Haley to Otis Redding and Buddy Holly. The year 1993 also let us paste ''Show Boat,''  ''Porgy and Bess'' and ''Oklahoma'' on the front of our letters. It continued with country-and-western stars: the Carter family grouped within an inch or so, Hank Williams and Patsy Cline.
Some people will ask why classical music has had to wait so long: how Elvis managed to precede George Szell. Maybe, on the other hand, the Postal Service has gotten its priorities right. Stamps are for everybody in this supposed egalitarian society of ours, and Elvis Presley and Louis Armstrong (another strong performer at the Postal Service) may be a lot more American than Eugene Ormandy (Hungary), Lily Pons (France) or Leopold Stokowski (the planet Mars).
Of course, what constitutes American music could depend on what our largely immigrant society considers permanence to be. (Read ''The Enigma of Arrival,'' by V. S. Naipul, for a subtle account of this kind of thing.) The closest we have to real American music may be a Sioux rain dance or the war chant of the Cheyenne, but even they probably originated on the other side of the Bering Straits. Gospel hymns and band music in the 19th century did take on a brazenness and candor that left their original European models a good distance behind, but the chords, the melodic gestures and the rhythms came from across the sea.
Black music may be more ours than any other kind, although it, too, results from a collision between the cultures of other continents. The 250th anniversary of William Billings's birth last Monday tells us that classical music is probably musical culture's longest-running act in this country. Generations before Scott Joplin and New Orleans jazz appeared, ''Don Giovanni'' had played successfully in New York, and the New York Philharmonic was in full swing.
BUT IF MOZART AND Beethoven have been the most revered musicians in America, they are the least ours. Composers like Louis Moreau Gottschalk (a Postal Service choice for this issue) have dented the European monolith but not much more. There is nothing European about Marilyn Monroe, on the other hand, and her stamp has done wondrously well.
Maybe we should just be grateful that the likes of Samuel Barber have made it into print at all. The Postal Service gets 40,000 unsolicited suggestions for stamp subjects every year, and the Citizens' Stamp Advisory Committee takes all of them seriously. The charge for Bart Simpson has so far been repelled. Beavis and Butt-head have likewise not passed muster. ''Left-Handed Americans,'' I am afraid, will not be honored; ''Perfume and Tobacco Pollution'' is to be left unvilified. ''Hope for the Inmate'' has a poignant ring, but sorry, no. My favorite reject is a stamp bearing the picture of a pretzel whose glue would taste of stale beer.
I am not a stamp collector, and so the idea of ''mint condition'' still puzzles me. A cancellation mark adds depth and resonance to any artifact I might want to save. The more pronounced it is, the better. I like the sense of purpose, the passage made, the experiences along the way, the destination arrived at. I like a stamp that has lived a life out in the world.
Putting a stamp on the upper right-hand corner of an envelope implies motion. It takes something inert and turns it into something active. It carries news about the latest Wagner ''Ring'' cycle to my sister in Massachussets and deposits placatory offerings with Visa card keypunch operators in South Dakota. If stamps turn my letters into flying machines, it is a comfort to know that Arthur Fiedler and colleagues will now be in the cockpit. ''On Wings of Song,'' the old lied goes. Indeed.
CLASSICAL VIEW
Mr. Svetlanov and the State Symphony, which he has directed since 1965 (formerly as the U.S.S.R. State Symphony), have been recording Mahler extensively over the last decade. Unfortunately, their performance of the Ninth did not live up even to the modest expectations raised by their 1992 recording of the work on Harmonia Mundi France/Saison Russe.
The massed strings of the orchestra produce a loose but wonderfully rich sound, which paid great dividends in the warmth of the opening and the bittersweet strains of the finale. But the first movement bogged down in the center, where Mr. Svetlanov seemed simply to be marking time.
The second movement was lethargic, lacking flow. And the Rondo gathered momentum only at the end. (Could Russians possibly miss the point of this ''burlesque,'' a rousing lead-in to the valedictory finale, just as in Tchaikovsky's ''Pathetique'' Symphony?)
This orchestra puts a much greater premium on color than on polish or precision, especially in the woodwinds and brasses, and the rusticity generally served well in Mahler. But some of the woodwind solos, mercilessly exposed, sounded strained and, on occasion, even inept.
The Tchaikovsky on Friday was a different story. Here Mr. Svetlanov needed only to set the music in motion, and the players took over, with mostly happy results (allowing always for a basic roughness of sonority and intonation).
The program left the beaten path with the Orchestral Suite No. 3 and strayed even further with the Concert Fantasy in G for piano and orchestra.
Vladimir Ovchinikov brought great virtuosity to the piano part, with a due appreciation for the work's lyrical passages, but a steely tone crept into the louder moments.
A certain curiosity attached even to the war horse in this program, the ''Marche Slave.'' In Soviet days, the politically inconvenient perorations of Lvov's ''God Preserve the Czar'' were expunged and replaced with an innocuous tune by Glinka, as in a recording of the work by this orchestra that found its way to the West in the late 70's.
Happily, Mr. Svetlanov and the orchestra reverted to the original version, which probably sounds fresher to them than it does to Americans.
MUSIC REVIEW
Since the mid-1960's, he has performed and recorded his music in nearly every possible instrumental combination, from solo alto saxophone to quadruple orchestra. His thinking doggedly pushes toward infinity: he has said that if all his compositions could be executed simultaneously, it would be the ultimate fulfillment of his music.
''Shala,'' written over five and a half years, cost around $90,000 to produce, stitched together with grant money including Mr. Braxton's 1994 MacArthur Fellowship. Nearly half of that went into scoring and copying costs for the 44-piece pit orchestra and nine improvising wind-instrument players; the rest went toward renting space, paying musicians and such colorful specifications as a Chinese dragon and a Wild West stage set. It is the third in a continuing  series -- there will be 12 three-act Braxton operas -- with the same 12 archetypal characters.
The unifying thread through the autonomous acts, as in a book of plotless William Saroyan short stories, is Mr. Braxton's anarchic, mystical, kindhearted world view. As a saxophone improviser, Mr. Braxton is usually discussed in jazz terms. But as a large-form composer, he is in the American lone-wolf classical tradition, related to John Cage and Harry Partch, inventors of their own musical language and philosophy.
The stage action in ''Shala'' sketches various manifestations of evil in modern society. In the first act, board members of a corporation that makes a lethal product discuss how to create more profit, while the Shala character protests to no avail; the last is a cult-indoctrination scene in which Shala wants in, despite her recognition that the cult is malevolent. The corporation isn't specified, nor is the cult (though it is known that Mr. Braxton had a brief involvement with scientology in the 1970's).  In long view, the opera is about liberalism's failure to overcome evil, but the ideas never boil down to simple allegory. This is the rare example of a protest opera that could stand to be more preachy.
In the libretto, written by Mr. Braxton, the characters express their divergent points of view -- all with the same language the composer uses to discuss his own work. Mr. Braxton is making a point when he gives the heroine and the villain the same oratorical style. But many of the libretto's missed opportunities were due to overly mundane language, rather than obfuscation, as in Act I, when Shala (played by Lisa Bielawa) challenges the corporate board by declaiming, ''This is wrong, people!'' In Mr. Braxton's world, ideas are unfortunately bigger than language.
The music, played by a consortium of jazz improvisers and classical musicians, had articulation and accuracy on Saturday night after only two rehearsals and one performance. Densely chromatic, with panning effects spreading across the orchestra, its tart, roughly atonal figures rose and ebbed mysteriously like a series of quickly breaking waves; a good portion of the vocal lines were embedded in the orchestra's melodies.  The singers performed with admirable gusto, given tricky intervals and a score so minutely detailed that their cues were difficult to hear; Mr. Braxton, conducting, had to give them clear signals to begin singing.
''Shala'' is a heady, complex work, and one felt grateful when Paul Germaine-Brown's imaginative and humorous stage directions laid bare some of its mysteries. On a basic level, the opera was comprehensible. But those who want a closer understanding are in for a journey much longer than the opera's 3 hours and 40 minutes: ''Shala'' emanates entirely from the composer's larger philosophy, as explained in his self-published book, ''Tri-Axium Writings.''
Mr. Braxton is a true visionary, but it's unfortunate that the opera should finally be so self-referential; ''Tri-Axium'' is a notoriously tough-going text, and even his most solid supporters have a hard time defining the ''concept of attraction'' that filters through the opera's entire libretto. With flexible notions of character and storytelling, ''Shala'' slips free from most formal functions of opera; like most visionaries, Mr. Braxton rewrites rules, as well as the terms by which his opera can be judged.
OPERA REVIEW
Qawwali songs seek spiritual ecstasy through both mind and body. As the lyrics praise saints and invoke divine love, the music surges forward on a driving beat from drums and the hand claps of a six-man chorus. The beat carries clear call-and-response melodies and improvisations that spiral into exuberant crescendos.
The Sabri Brothers have two main vocalists, Haji Maqbool Ahmed Sabri and Haji Mahmood Ghaznavi Sabri, who both play harmonium; a third brother, Haji Kamal Sabri, sang occasionally and played percussion. Maqbool Sabri has a hearty, ringing voice, expounding melodies with an embracing fervor; Mahmood Sabri sings slightly higher, breaking into speedy swoops and percussive zig-zags.
Songs began by establishing the music's mode with sustained vocal tones and curlicues of harmonium; then the beat kicked in and the music began its ascent toward the ecstatic. The songs were flexible, letting the singers linger if they were on an improvisational hot streak. Two songs paused for some pedagogy: Kamal Sabri demonstrated chest, throat and nose voices, and Mahmood Sabri and Mohammed Andwar on tabla drums presented the notes of the scale.
The Sabri Brothers are less flashy improvisers than Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, currently the best-known qawwali singer in the West. But they're definitely flamboyant enough, spurring each other as they trade lines, pushing the chorus to ever more rousing singalongs. After an hourlong set of four songs, the Sabri Brothers seemed to be just getting started.
Cornershop puts together, and sometimes blends, Indian music with the drumbeats and loose ends of alternative rock. Its album, ''Woman's Gotta Have It'' (Luaka Bop/Warner Brothers), toys intelligently with culture clashes. But onstage, where the band avoided eye contact with the audience, Cornershop had only one surefire song: ''Jullandar Shere,'' with devotional lyrics, an uplifting melody and a drone with room for sitar, guitar and synthesizer. Wisely, the band played it twice.  MUSIC REVIEW
And so it went. The Scherzo had biting accents, driving power and exuberance, like chase music for a silent Western. Prokofiev marks the final movement Vivace (Lively), and was it ever: a perpetual-motion whirl with time out for an expansive middle section.
The performance of the daunting Sonata No. 6 was boldly articulated and brashly humorous. His playing had percussive power but was never steely like that of so many other Prokofiev players.
This recital was the first of three concerts Mr. Bronfman is devoting to Prokofiev and Schumann this season. The main Schumann work on Sunday was ''Humoreske.'' Many pianists exaggerate the fantastical, unhinged side of Schumann, and it was refreshing to hear this great work played with such scrupulous clarity and keen intelligence. That said, a certain rhapsodic quality was missing in the dreamy episodes.
Yet Mr. Bronfman is a superb pianist and an exceptional interpreter of Prokofiev. As an encore, no less, he dispatched the arm-blurring final movement of the Sonata No 7. The controlled frenzy of his performance elicited an uncontrolled frenzy from his listeners.
Other programs in this series will feature chamber music, songs and more piano works.
ANTHONY TOMMASINI
The homey quality was supplied by the first performance of Francis Thorne's Cello Concerto No. 2, played here with steady fluency by Eugene Moye. It was Mr. Thorne and Mr. Davies who originally thought up the American Composers Orchestra in 1975, and this was another of their frequent reunions. Mr. Thorne is happiest when devising generous, gentle, wide-spaced melodic lines. He wrestles uneasily with the problems of making a relatively reticent instrument react with and against much bigger and brighter forces.
Mr. Thorne tries to balance discrepancies of weight by reducing the orchestra part to near anonymity. The listener is left in a state of vagueness, able to make out string accompaniments as a kind of pale wash. The wanness is only underlined by the touches of solo wind and timpani. The result robs Mr. Thorne's obvious melodic gifts of their rightful platform. Not even the pizzicatos of the second movement relieve the general sense of anemia.
Jacob Druckman's ''Brangle'' more than made up for the Concerto's retiring qualities. Sunday's concert was to have offered Druckman's new piano concerto, but the piece was left unfinished by his death last spring. ''Brangle,'' referring to the Renaissance dance form, is from 1988, and its allusions to ancient delicacies are tongue in cheek. This is loquacious music, a big-city piece that visits every possible neighborhood along the way. Brass blares, timpani boom, winds shriek, mallet percussion ripples, strings turn sentimental. Rapid repetition and uneven meter keep the listener on edge. ''Brangle'' talks too much but it talks well; the force and diversity of its conversation is not easily ignored.
''Hear Ye! Hear Ye!,'' Aaron Copland's courtroom ballet music from 1934, came after intermission. Its pictorial touches -- a twisted national anthem, gunshots, crowd  noises, even a wedding scene -- are a delight.
Without bluster or overkill, Copland captures all the fragments of Prohibition-era America. Jazz and popular song fold smoothly into European modernism. Folk songs pop up; movies have their say. All appear with such naturalness that there is no feeling of agenda or self-promotion. This  was a happy half-hour, strongly played.
MUSIC REVIEW
That instigated a rendition of Stephen Sondheim's ''Losing My Mind,'' one of the high points of a set that traversed the Beatles, Frank Loesser's ''If I Were a Bell,'' Doris Day and Mr. Waits. Now touring behind a live album, ''It Happened One Night'' (Metro Blue), Ms. Cole has a bona fide show, with naturally laconic pacing, and a band that can turn on a steamy, languorous effect -- sort of like the Disney World version of how a jazz club sounds.
The audience's happiness was palpable, hearing songs their parents knew, sung, finally, with an updated sensibility they could feel in their own mouths. It's not nostalgic or timeless: it's very 90's. But Ms. Cole is sometimes too sly for her own good, and when innuendo -- the secret ingredient of all the songs in her book -- becomes too broad and overriding, it's not innuendo anymore.
JAZZ REVIEW
Ms. Carter, who is celebrating the release of one of her best albums in years, ''I'm Yours, You're Mine'' (Verve), is a master of textural change, and she cued the band to pick up volume, or drop away. The pianist, Travis Shook, slunk through key changes, and alternated playing melodies, or fully harmonized chords. At times the demands overwhelmed the musicians; during a duet featuring her bassist, the music lost tempo, and both musicians drifted out of tune. But at its best, Ms. Carter's music can still a loud room with its beauty and intelligence, the one perfect note that stops conversation.
PETER WATROUS
Music in Review
''SURFIN' CHRISTMAS''  (Dwell). The Wave Benders are a Dutch surf group. They're post-Ventures, working a lot of more modern textures into their sound, but familiar riffs stuff the record. Still, they have precision, and a theremin, too, the key element in their otherworldly ''Little Drummer Boy.'' ''We Wish You a Merry Christmas'' may be a little too eager to please, featuring the lyrics in about half a dozen languages.
BEN RATLIFF
''STAR BRIGHT''  (Mercury). The normally cool Vanessa Williams sounds warmer and more inviting than usual on a tastefully glitzy collection of carols (''Hark, the Herald Angels Sing''), pop songs (''Baby, It's Cold Outside''), custom-made seasonal numbers (Rob Mathes's title song) and an elaborately arranged spiritual (''Go Tell It on the Mountain''). The lush arrangements on several numbers are perked up with light pop-funk beats. ''Baby, It's Cold Outside,'' a song usually milked for comedy, becomes an appealingly slinky pop-soul duet with Bobby Caldwell.
STEPHEN HOLDEN
''KIHOALU CHRISTMAS: HAWAIIAN SLACK KEY GUITAR''  (Dancing Cat/Windham Hill/BMG). Hawaiian slack-key guitarists use stately, resonant finger picking, concealing their technical feats as they display melodies amid gleaming arpeggios. Fans of John Fahey or Leo Kottke should warm to the instrumentals, played by some of Hawaii's best-known guitar soloists. Although the vocals can grow cloying, there are only three of them; one is a Hawaiian translation of ''Silent Night.''
JON PARELES
Mr. Reich, whose 60th birthday will be celebrated on Monday evening with a concert by Bang on a Can and the Spit Orchestra at the Walter Reade Theater in Lincoln Center, remains faithful to one aspect of Minimalist doctrine. His music continues to rest on strict, gradually unfolding structural processes. Thirty years ago, these would have dictated the course of the composition. Today they are employed less dogmatically, yet they still provide his music with a backbone as tough and resilient as Stravinsky's.
''Proverb'' is inspired by the mesmerizing 12th-century sacred music of Perotin, whose repetitive melodic patterns and long static drones have always sounded like a startling anticipation of Minimalism. For Mr. Reich, the frankly neomedieval surface of ''Proverb'' might seem a stunning departure. Yet its structure is entirely consistent with his previous work. Throughout his career, Mr. Reich has been obsessed with the construction of intricate canons. Here, three sopranos gradually elongate the canon until what began as a descending line ends up as a succession of drones. Above them, two tenors weave ecstatic, textless melismas.
But the structure of ''Proverb'' cannot account for its magic. The text, an 11-word aphorism by the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, could be the Minimalist credo: ''How small a thought it takes to fill a whole life.'' No chromaticism disturbs the unblemished B minor tonality; no large complement of instruments muddies the translucent texture. In this austere context, the poignant, sustained, lyricism of the sopranos -- something new to Mr. Reich's music -- becomes all the more striking. The vocalists, from Paul Hillier's superb Theater of Voices, sing in a vibratoless style familiar from early-music practice.
In the 1980's, the invention of the sampling keyboard allowed Mr. Reich to synchronize recorded speech with a live instrumental ensemble. The first fruit of this technology was the masterly ''Different Trains,'' of 1988. The same technique was vastly expanded to generate ''The Cave,'' a 1994 music-theater work created by Mr. Reich and his wife, the video artist Beryl Korot.
With ''City Life'' (performed here by the Steve Reich Ensemble) Mr. Reich returns to the manageable dimensions of ''Different Trains.'' Here, taking advantage of even more refined technology, he preloads the sampling keyboards with speech fragments and sound effects, enabling them to be played with flexible tempo in live performance. As a result, the samples are integrated into the musical fabric with astonishing fluency.
Like ''Proverb,''  ''City Life'' gains strength from its systematic structure. Its five movements form an arc: the first, third and fifth use sampled speech sounds; the second and fourth use sampled urban noises. Since each of the speech sections employs only one brief sample, its melodic contour must generate the entire contrapuntal texture. The street vendor's phrase ''Check it out'' becomes an ascending three-note motif, which permeates the first movement.
''City Life'' is an affectionate soundscape of New York couched in musical terms. It opens and closes with a haunting, wistful chorale that pays homage to another New York-born composer, Aaron Copland. With this subdued start, Mr. Reich announces that the work will be as much a nostalgic look at the city of his childhood as a portrait of the present day.
Only in the central movement does he unleash the full force of urban anxiety. The raw material consists of two phrases, ''It's been a honeymoon . . . can't take no more,'' recorded at a political rally outside City Hall. Two sampling keyboards play the fragments in a rhythmicized, percussive manner akin to rap. In a deliberate reference to Mr. Reich's first mature composition, ''It's Gonna Rain,'' of 1965, the speech is layered on itself until it loses meaning and turns into pure musical sound.
Mr. Reich has always fared best in works of moderate scale written for chamber ensembles of his own invention. His interlocking counterpoint requires precision and clarity, and the traditional orchestra, with its army of strings, can only render it murky. The crystalline ''Nagoya Marimbas,'' a rapidly paced updating of Mr. Reich's phasing process, is a brief, exhilarating duet for virtuoso marimba players (here, Bob Becker and James Preiss). Rather than inhibiting Mr. Reich's creativity, the intimate scale of chamber music inspires him, and the proof lies in the new, long-breathed lyricism of ''Proverb'' and the surprising dissonance and chromaticism of ''City Life.''
As the 20th-century staggers to a close, some composers are rehashing 19th-century Romanticism; others prefer a limitless eclecticism or borrow self-consciously from popular culture, and a few still cling to the ghost of Serialism. Mr. Reich remains a rare exception, working in a language of his own making. It would be hard to think of any contemporary American music more important than this.
RECORDINGS VIEW  K. Robert Schwarz is the author of ''Minimalists.''
As before, generalized frustration with society is still an important theme in the group's lyrics. But the new songs, addressing such topics as televised murder trials and cyber-communication, have shifted the locus of alienation from a high-school mind to that of a middle-aged libertarian searching for meaning in an unhealthy, dangerous world.
Fast-cutting video backdrops like a hundred flipped television channels illustrated the songs, a good old device for conveying a world gone mad. Rush has hundreds of images in its paranoia bank, but the ones that kept popping up were Richard Nixon, J.F.K., Jacqueline Onassis and fashion-magazine models. (One of the most charming aspects of the band's Ayn Randian mindset is that they're still shocked by advertising.)
The concert mixed new material with back catalogue hits including ''Subdivisions'' and ''Tom Sawyer''; a long stretch from their album-length suite ''2112'' brought the crowd to standing ecstasy. Still, the presentation was so hard and shiny that it was nearly impossible to discern whether the players were having a good or bad night. Rush used to have more of an improvisational esthetic, but Alex Lifeson's guitar solos were few and quite short; the music is built on chords and changing time signatures, with the occasional gentle strumming in a highly arranged introduction or coda.
The exception and the climax was Neil Peart's drum solo, a 10-minute polyrhythmic bonanza performed on two different drum sets accessed by means of a revolving platform. With cowbells, synthesized pads, cymbals of every description, Mr. Peart's drum set was a small nation-state unto itself. It was a dream of a drum set, a thing of comically vast proportions -- like the band's idea of a protest song.
ROCK REVIEW
The Tokyo Quartet has been relatively stable. Two of the founding players remain: the violist Kazuhide Isomura, and the cellist Sadao Harada. The second violinist, Kikuei Ikeda, has been a member since 1974. The Canadian violinist Peter Oundjian, the first non-Japanese member, was first violinist for the last 15 concert seasons.
Mr. Kopelman, former concertmaster of the Moscow Philharmonic Orchestra, comes from a musical heritage that would seem at odds with the Tokyo Quartet's, which has valued impeccable ensemble and clear-headed interpretations. True to his roots, Mr. Kopelman is an expressive, rich-toned violinist. Being of Hungarian descent, he brought a quality of Gypsy dance to the intensely spirited finale of Brahms's Quartet in A minor. His flair seemed to affect his colleagues, who played with an abandon in the Brahms that is unusual for them, to the point that full-bodied, climactic moments were sometimes strident.
But overall Mr. Kopelman was a team player. The performance of Schubert's Quartet in A Minor (''Rosamunde'') was lyrical and elegant. If anything, he went along too well with the status quo. The Andante was gentle to the point of placidity.
A new Quartet for Piano and Strings by Ezra Laderman received its New York premiere. Mr. Laderman's gruff, kinetic music mixes pungently atonal elements into a harmonic language that is tonally rooted and clearly directed. The most striking aspect of the piece is the way the rigorously crafted musical flow keeps being interrupted by episodes that seem to come from nowhere. The whole work, three movements played without pause, is intensely dramatic, especially the fitful Presto finale.
Mr. Kopelman sat out this performance, which was bold and convincing. The sprawling piano part, thick with leaping chords, was played commandingly by Peter Frankl.
MUSIC REVIEW
Ruth Brown, Iridium, 44 West 63d Street, Manhattan, (212) 582-2121. She's a blues belter, one of the last. Ruth Brown is an immensely talented singer and entertainer who puts her music somewhere in the happy area where jazz and rhythm-and-blues intersect. There are two shows: the first, 6:45 to 9:15 P.M., includes a three-course meal, champagne and the Ruth Brown performance at 8 P.M. (must exit at 9). The cover charge is $125 a person. The second show, at 10 P.M., includes a four-course meal, a bottle of champagne and a bagel breakfast at 2 A.M. The cover charge is $243 a person.
P. W.
Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve -- Jazz
But as several high-powered performances on laser disk attest, the experience of a requiem has something else in common with opera: It is better seen than merely heard. Irrespective of whether one believes in the religious precept, the profound urgency of the requiem's message, especially as it is heightened by music, bears a specifically communal weight.
To experience a choral requiem as it was meant to be, one should be able to look into the faces of the singing hosts, behold the assembled orchestra -- the very trumpets of the Tuba Mirum -- and sense the solemnity of the occasion, the place and the fellow travelers gathered there. To be sure, the music matters most, but the three videos at hand, all from Pioneer Classics and all dating from the 1980's, reveal for good or ill how much more there is to the music than meets the ear.
In the recording of Verdi's Requiem, conducted by Claudio Abbado at the 1982 Edinburgh Festival (PC-94-055), the ear almost concedes advantage to the eye, though certainly not for lack of musical star-power. Mr. Abbado's stellar cast includes the sopranos Margaret Price and Jessye Norman, the tenor Jose Carreras and the bass Ruggero Raimondi, together with the festival chorus and the London Symphony Orchestra.
After the magnificent Verdi Requiem presented this month by James Levine and the Metropolitan Opera Chorus and Orchestra at Carnegie Hall, any mere recording might seem sonically pale. Those choral volleys of ''Dies irae, dies illa'' struck to the heart, right through the chest, with the force of cannons. The cannons are conspicuously missing from Mr. Abbado's Edinburgh event.
The recording's curiously unbalanced sound -- thumping but not quite defined in the bass, and weighted toward chorus over orchestra -- clouds the big gestures. And a lack of presence tends to miniaturize, even trivialize, the many subtle effects of Mr. Abbado's lyrical interpretation.
What does come through, thanks partly to the reinforcement of the camera's eye, is the bloom on the solo voices. Ms. Price and Ms. Norman take radiant turns through the Recordare and Agnus Dei, and Mr. Raimondi provides a solid anchor for the quartet at every moment. Yet nothing is more arresting than the Ingemisco, sung in firm, gleaming voice by Mr. Carreras several years before he became seriously ill.
Two other moments, weaving sight and sound together, stand out in the memory. At the blazing conclusion of the Dies Irae, Mr. Abbado, conducting as ever without a score, seems almost to shudder from the impact of the music -- seems, indeed, to check himself like a man who has just withstood a hail of bullets and can't quite believe that he is still alive and whole.
And at the end of the Requiem, the camera peers into Ms. Price's face and finds the fearful questioning that stamps the final pages of the music. ''Libera me,'' she whispers, her lips barely moving, her eyes cast upward, searching, beseeching. The whole meaning of Verdi's Requiem might be read there, with no sound at all.
Would that the uncluttered, insightful filming of the Verdi applied as well to the Berlioz Requiem, performed by the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra and Chorus, led by Colin Davis, in 1989 (PC-96-138). Here, when the camera addresses the orchestra from almost any angle, one gets an eyeful of microphone booms; and more often than not, a shot of the chorus puts an idle timpanist front and center.
But musically and sonically, the presentation is breathtaking; and the soaring sanctuary of Regensburg Cathedral does visual justice to Berlioz's ''Grande Messe des Morts.'' Oddly, Mr. Davis did not fully exploit this grand space in deploying the huge forces called for in Berlioz's score. Instead of scattering brass bands to the far corners of the cathedral for the Tuba Mirum, the conductor simply placed a cluster of instruments on either side of the main ''stage'' area.
In every other respect, Mr. Davis probes the deeply passionate core of this music with purpose and conviction. His expertise in Berlioz was established through recordings of the complete orchestral works a decade before this production, and here one senses a sure hand at work in an intensity that never exceeds a human scale of emotion: of dread and devotion and hope.
BERLIOZ'S BRILLIANT setting, at least the match of Verdi's in its vibrant colors and vast gestures, is played out at full dramatic throttle by orchestra and chorus alike. But it can be argued that the expressive heart of this tumultuous work lies in the repose of the ''Sanctus,'' for tenor solo. Keith Lewis imbues the music with an exquisite gentleness and assurance borne on a voice of muted gold.
The production has its odd features. Perhaps understandably, the video director was fascinated by the dozen or so kettledrums strewn from one side of the stage to the other. But fascination turns to silliness at the end: As the music dies away and the viewer's perspective is drawn away from the ''stage'' in a longer and longer shot, each recurring timpani stroke prompts a cutaway to the timpanist. The effect is jarring and disruptive.
Just as questionable is the decision to include a tolling of the cathedral bells after the end of the Requiem. The bells aren't part of Berlioz's score, so why are they heard? The camera remains fixed on Mr. Davis, who stands rather awkwardly until the bells seem to have ended, then gestures with raised eyebrows to let the musicians know they can shuffle off. Berlioz, a supreme dramatist, would never have countenanced such an anticlimax. At least the viewer can stop the show at a better place.
Again with the Bavarian forces, but sans bells, Mr. Davis presides over a 1984 production of the Mozart Requiem that combines the best musical, sonic and visual qualities of the Berlioz and Verdi disks.
While this Mozart (PC-94-053) has its demonic side, notably a hair-raising Confutatis, it is essentially warm, graceful, luminous and embracing. How much truer to Mozartean opera could it be? The soloistic ''characters'' are a style-savvy, wonderfully matched foursome: the soprano Edith Mathis, the contralto Trudeliese Schmidt, the tenor Peter Schreier and the bass Gwynne Howell.
PORTRAITLIKE closeups of both soloists and choristers reflect the intimacy of Mr. Davis's approach to the score. The Tuba Mirum presents an especially engaging effect, with Mr. Howell's image and that of the accompanying solo trombone melded into an ethereal duet for the eye as well as the ear.
It's a modest bit of electronic legerdemain, but it takes one to a place deep within the music, and perhaps to a spiritual connection accessible only to the video viewer.
VIDEO VIEW
Paul Whelan, a New Zealand-born baritone also making his debut, must be the tallest Schaunard the Met has ever presented. He had to duck to walk through the doorway to the bohemians' garret. Yet he is a graceful, lanky, boyishly handsome man who commands the stage. His voice is robust and pleasant; perhaps he will return in a more vocally revealing role. It would be great to see him as Figaro towering over a flustered Count.
Patricia Racette, who made her Met debut last season as Musetta, sang her first Mimi at the house. Her voice is bright, clear and full. Mimi is a more vulnerable character when sung by a soprano with more warmth in her sound. But Ms. Racette's voice lent itself to her conception of Mimi as a naturally vivacious woman. Marcello Giordani sang Rodolfo, his role in his Met debut last season. The Italian tenor has been reworking his technique in recent months, and he still sounds like he is settling into a new approach. His basic gift is undeniable: a luxurious, Italianate tenor with a bright ping in the top range. But there is unevenness in his phrasing and production.
Gwynne Geyer was a winning Musetta; Hao Jiang Tian was a solid Colline. The loudest ovations went to the conductor, Nello Santi, and with good reason. Though not the most incisive technician and prone to excessive tempo modulations, Mr. Santi is a link to an Italian heritage that is languishing. He shaped the score with arching lyricism and supple pacing. The orchestra responded with particularly nuanced and sensitive playing.
MUSIC REVIEW
There are all sorts of improvisational virtuosities a leader can bring to the stage, and Mr. Walden, while clearly an original saxophonist, did something equally impressive. He led his band, using silences and repetitions, and he made the trio sound organic. Mr. Parson and Mr. Burno, driving hard, rose up and fell away. Mr. Walden's improvisations were bedded in the noise, but they also stood up front. The band was listening, and when Mr. Walden changed his sound, making it soft and guileless, his band mates became compassionate. And when he made his tone coarse and his ideas insistent, they sounded pitiless, with Mr. Parson piling figures on top of figures, his snapping snare drum demanding interaction. Mr. Walden and his trio are to perform at Smalls the first Thursday of every month.
JAZZ REVIEW
Indeed, the looming presence of cameras, however well masked, was inescapable. But the television exposure is probably what kept the orchestra's principal players in their seats during a concerto, when they typically run off to play cards or do crossword puzzles. Their participation here was vital not only because the soloist, the young Siberian-born violinist Maxim Vengerov, was first-rate but also because Dvorak's concerto relies so heavily on chamberlike interplay involving soloists from the orchestra; even the timpanist, Roland Kohloff, got into the act.
Joseph Robinson, the oboist, had perhaps the toughest assignment, playing a long pianissimo stretch in close parallel to Mr. Vengerov's finely nuanced melody. Mr. Robinson played beautifully, as did other woodwind and horn soloists in their many exposed passages.
Like his former compatriot the young pianist Yevgeny Kissin, Mr. Vengerov, who now lives in Amsterdam, seems something of a throwback to the great Romantic age of heroic instrumentalists. His very posture -- bolt upright, with fiddle held high -- bespeaks the command of his performance.
Not that his playing is note-perfect; it is much more interesting than that. Right from the stratospheric notes that ended his first two flourishes -- the first pulled back dynamically, the second reinforced, all at his own initiative -- it was obvious that Mr. Vengerov would take a hands-on approach to interpretation and risk all to make his expressive points.
Seldom has an instrument been heard to sing as Mr. Vengerov's did in the Adagio, or to dance as it did in the finale. If a listener did not entirely appreciate the way the violinist leaned into a soulful descending figure in the finale, the disagreement was in the nature of healthy, invigorating debate.
Where surely no bonus was needed, Mr. Vengerov offered a substantial one, the Sarabande of Bach's D minor Partita, as an encore.
Mr. Masur's work was expert throughout. He superbly conveyed the spirit of the Tchaikovsky: the composer's youthful impetuosity tripping over itself; the core of playfulness beneath the grandiose exterior.
Again, the orchestra played wonderfully. Even the famously erratic principal horn player, Philip Myers, was fully on his mettle here.
Let's do television more often.
MUSIC REVIEW
The debut format, updated under the rubric Distinctive Debuts, returned to the scene of many prior crimes on Friday with a new in-house series at Weill Recital Hall. If this evening with the Eroica Trio sets the tone, the word ''debut'' will take on a different meaning. These players are strangers neither to the public nor one another. They formed 10 years ago, won a Walter F. Naumburg competition in 1991, made a Lincoln Center debut the same year, performed coast to coast and in Japan, and arrived at this concert on the crest of a six-concert European tour, part of the Distinctive Debuts'  international format. The Eroica Trio, in other words was not being born, simply receiving a nice boost into adolescence.
Erika Nickrenz, pianist; Adela Pena, violinist, and Sara Sant'Ambrogio, cellist, form a happy partnership. They are at the same technical level (very high) and share an ardent, energetic and tightly coiled approach to playing. Their glamorous looks and slinky black dresses will not make their careers, but they won't hurt.
The Eroica announced itself with direct-current playing of a Vivaldi C minor Trio Sonata: a fierce pursuit that measured even the slightest hesitational accent to a fine point. These young women revel in rhythmic energies mutually agreed on. The barroom syncopations of Paul Schoenfield's ''Cafe Music for Trio'' took the ear directly back to the Vivaldi at the start of the program.
Mr. Schoenfield assembles artifacts from American popular music of the early 20th century. Blurred minor-key fragments after Scriabin or Chopin, or bluesy portamento ornamenting long melodies, act as a kind of glue. The piece has charm and poise, if not the ear for color  demonstrated by the Ellen Taaffe Zwilich piece that preceded it.
Ms. Zwilich's Trio lightens her customary grim, stressful rhetoric by placing much of the piano part in the treble range. The two strings rumble melodically and imitatively beneath it, and an uncommon clarity is created. A buzzing four-note figure marks the first movement; one piano ostinato seems a conscious homage to Debussy's ''Feux d'Artifice''; the finale is a three-way race marked by the piano's busy passage work.
The pessimist in me dreaded the Eroica's high-energy approach as applied to the ''Dumky'' Trio after  intermission; but these high-tech young operatives relax and bend as well. Much of Dvorak's marvelous piece reads like a cello concerto, and Ms. Sant'Ambrogio's balance of taste with expression was admirable. The Eroica Trio will go far.
MUSIC REVIEW
The duo favors major keys rather than the minor modes of much Celtic music. Playing Scottish tunes, Mr. Bain used a singing, long-breathed tone, but he also had other approaches: drone-string double-stops for Cajun tunes and, for Canadian ones, a brisk, detached articulation with his bow bouncing lightly on the strings. For one whirlwind showpiece, he used both those techniques along with quickly plucked notes from his left hand.
They didn't need speed to shine. Mr. Cunningham writes exquisite slow airs, with a tinge of stately Baroque counterpoint. In the duo's renditions, the accordion and fiddle merged to hint at the sound of pipes. But Mr. Cunningham also moved away from tradition. His accordion was hooked up to a device that could make his bass notes and chords sound like a piano or like simulated strings; the effect was slightly artificial.
JON PARELES
It's not that Mr. Martsch breaks new ground: he stands on his own ground, playing guitar in a deeply personal style and writing lyrics that treat the ordinary with extraordinary intelligence. His music is a rock of aphorisms. And when it all comes together, as it does on his latest album, ''Perfect From Now On'' (Warner Brothers), the music has a visceral impact that makes one realize that what has been lost in rock since the 60's isn't the artists but the willingness of music fans to find the artists by themselves.
The group's 1993 debut album, ''Ultimate Alternative Wavers,'' showcased Mr. Martsch's guitar playing, with rock songs exploding into eight-minute barrages of twisted strings, modulated feedback and squealing sustained notes. The next album, ''There's Nothing Wrong With Love,'' focused on his lyrics, with shorter, poppier songs about childbirth, elementary school crushes, stepfathers and other growing pains. ''Perfect From Now On'' combines the best of both albums; the result is eight experimentally structured pop songs dissecting social relationships to the gnarled tune of Mr. Martsch's battered guitar.
Details like the song title ''Untrustable/Pt. 2 (About Someone Else)'' suggest just how much Mr. Martsch's songs are based on real life. The fact that a song is almost certainly about a real person brings to life to angrily shouted refrains like ''And God is whoever you're performing for.'' Like many guitar heroes of the 60's and the alternative-rock deconstructionists of the 90's, Mr. Martsch writes songs that stray from the verse-chorus-verse format for extended instrumental passages, sometimes returning to the vocals with a completely new tempo, melody and words. Yet the guitar heroics never seem indulgent. Every bent note, every whack of the tremolo bar is invested with the introspection, passion or rage of the lyrics.
It helps that many of the lyrics deal with sound. ''I can't get that sound you make out of my head/ I can't even figure out what's making it/ No one around even seems to be noticing/ It's only small enough for me,'' Mr. Martsch sings, seemingly to his young child, on the cello-infused ''I Would Hurt a Fly.''
Part of the beauty of ''Perfect From Now On'' comes from Mr. Martsch's delivery. He is not a great singer -- his sound is part whine, part strangled scream -- but his voice is a great instrument. He pauses between words and breaks lines midsentence to create double meanings and suspense that make lyrics that look smart on paper seem profound in song. Just listen ''Made-Up Dreams,'' in which the sea of guitars parts for the line ''No one wants to hear/ What you dreamt about/ Unless you dreamt about'' -- pause -- ''them.'' Or the catch phrase of ''Out of Sight'': ''We're special/ In other ways/ In ways our/  Mothers appreciate.''
If you've never heard Built to Spill before, you may not like ''Perfect From Now On'' the first time you hear it. You may not like it the second time you hear it. But you will like it the first time you listen to it.
RECORDINGS VIEW
Michelle DeYoung, an American mezzo-soprano, has a burnished, powerful voice that could take her far. Since completing the Metropolitan Opera's Young Artist Development Program in 1995, she has appeared with major orchestras internationally, and this spring will sing Fricka in the Met's production of ''Das Rheingold,'' a role for which the statuesque, charismatic artist seems ideally suited.
But Ms. DeYoung has not yet figured out how to modulate her voice for recital work. This was the one shortcoming of her otherwise accomplished program on Friday night. Her skillful and sensitive accompanist, Kevin Murphy, played the entire recital with the piano lid fully open, and even so, Ms. DeYoung tended to overwhelm him.
She brought operatic grandeur to Haydn's dramatic cantata ''Arianna a Naxos.'' And though her approach was valid, she overdid it, seldom lifting a phrase into what singers call head voice, almost always singing with full-throated power.
In Debussy's ''Chansons de Bilitis,'' Ms. DeYoung demonstrated a capacity to spin out soft phrases that would have been welcomed elsewhere, even during a blazing set of Strauss songs.
Mahler's ''Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen'' were sung with an involvement and vocal presence that were often moving. But they were too throbbingly vocalized. The first long phrase of the final song is marked ''piano,'' yet at its peak Ms. DeYoung sang with an outpouring of sound that seemed pushed.
She concluded with Schoenberg's rather heavy-handed cabaret songs, ''Brettlieder,'' which were suitably bawdy. But they are most effective when sung by a cabaret singer with about a third the voice of Ms. DeYoung.
ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Music in Review: Classical Music
White blues singers, in particular, often feel a need to compensate for a lack of depth with a surplus of physical contortions. But Tracy Nelson, who performed on Saturday night, didn't need ham acting in the second of her two sets. A rather ungainly presence onstage, she simply clasped her hands over the microphone and gently closed her eyes, and out of her mouth came a rich, deep and full mezzo-soprano able to convey as much emotion, if not more, as her best-known recordings of the 1960's. With her voice, Ms. Nelson could have taken the ragged blues-rock path to stardom, as Janis Joplin did, or, like Linda Ronstadt, mined the mass archives of popular and traditional music.
Instead she chose to chase her musical muse from the coffeehouses of her birthplace in Madison, Wis., to the blues bars of Chicago to the psychedelic scene in San Francisco (where she formed the rootsy band Mother Earth) to a farm in Nashville, where she spent the entire 1980's on hiatus. Though Ms. Nelson's latest album, ''Move On'' (Rounder), can get syrupy and trite, the singer was anything but that in concert.
Ms. Nelson and her quartet of mostly pick-up musicians focused on her very direct, guileless and personal take on the blues, moving from wrenching early material like the gospel-inflected ''Down So Low'' to Bessie Smith standards to the Bee Gee's-like title track of her new album.
The lyrics were all simple -- about wanting love, losing love and stealing love -- but they came wrapped in a voice bent on proving that behind those simple words lay complex emotions.
NEIL STRAUSS
IN PERFORMANCE
Importance is achieved without grandiloquence. What matters is often a detail: how, for example, a young attendant looks away as he leads on the wounded king, Amfortas. Most remarkable is the calm. The production is neither abased nor frightened by its responsibilities. It has no empty pride and no false shame. This, it says, is the best we can do. So it responds to the challenge of the work. The gods have gone. We are on our own now. ''Parsifal'' in this production does not understate the task, but it arrives at a sure and steady hope as a veil of light descends to leave only Parsifal with us, no hero but a man.
Mr. Rattle, whose enthusiasm for this production made him want to make it the occasion of his first Wagner in any theater, conducts to match. His tempos are often slow, but never groaning or enfeebled. The sound produced by the Rotterdam Philharmonic is rich and alive: the brass produce a splendid sound, there are fine woodwind solos and the strings use a quick vibrato to intensify sustained tones.
Nothing lags or slopes away. Motion, however slow, is inexorably forward. Long periods are shaped toward single climaxes, or, rather, appear to get there by themselves. And the subsequent relaxation is as important as the buildup.
Mr. Rattle and his orchestra convey an impression of geological weight. One layer will often be moving forward and upward while another is disintegrating, so that one seems to be hearing two tempos simultaneously. The urgency of the performance also brings an absence of self-pity, and perhaps thereby a strong correlation between the suffering of Amfortas and the rage of Klingsor, the two faces of spiritual mutilation.
The singers, knowing what they are in, excel themselves. Robert Lloyd must have sung Gurnemanz a hundred times, and only he will know if he has ever been so consistently strong, gentle and humane. I doubt he has. Poul Elming as Parsifal has a thrilling ring and a striking unforced presence: he is a bright blank page across which the music can write its story. Violeta Urmana gives a warm, feeling performance as Kundry, and Wolfgang Schone towers in distress.
MUSIC REVIEW
Her band steamed through her 1960's-style rock, echoing the Rolling Stones and the Band, while Ms. Crow concentrated on her singing. There are reserves of strength behind her light, girlish tone. She scuffed up her voice to turn innocence to disillusion, and she stretched her melodies with swoops and elaborate breaks. Now and then, she stopped the band and unfurled a blues melisma but shrugged off what could have been a dramatic pause.
Her set moved from showiness to simplicity. By the time she reached ''Home,'' a first-person ballad about a marriage turned cold, she had already proved her virtuosity, and she let the song's quiet heartbreak come through unembellished.
Ms. Crow seemed most at ease during her encores, when guest singers -- Emmylou Harris, Levon Helm of the Band, Jakob Dylan of the Wallflowers and Joan Osborne -- joined her to sing ''Pale Blue Eyes,'' ''Not Fade Away,'' ''Evangeline'' and ''The Weight.'' Ms. Crow belted to match any of them, then gladly took a place among the backup singers. Ms. Crow is to return to Roseland on Thursday.
With the Wallflowers sharing the bill, Friday's concert was a tribute to 1960's folk-rock. The Wallflowers have soaked up the sound of Bob Dylan's ''Blonde on Blonde,'' topping midtempo guitar strumming with a tootling organ, and they play the old style with the vitality of true believers, adding a little 1970's-rock heft.
Although Jakob Dylan is Bob Dylan's son, and he can recreate his father's wheezier side, his singing and songwriting derive as much from early Bruce Springsteen, seeking romance in lowlife settings. Unfortunately, his voice grows monotonous, and his lyrics surround a few promising lines with cliches; at times, they might be Mad Libs versions of folk-rock standards. The Wallflowers also had a guest: Carly Simon, joining in on the choruses in a version of ''You're So Vain'' that traded its venom for sodden self-pity.
POP REVIEW
The rise of the music industry from a grubby mom-and-pop operation, through its hip phase, into a devouring international behemoth is rivetingly chronicled in Fred Goodman's book, ''The Mansion on the Hill.'' Taking its title from a Hank Williams song in which a poor country boy gazes enviously at a palatial hilltop aerie, the book is a personalized business history with a nostalgic countercultural slant. Its author, a freelance journalist and former editor of Rolling Stone, laments rock's  metamorphosis from an idealistic youth-culture platform into a coldly marketed consumer product.
Because it would take thousands of pages to tell the whole story, Mr. Goodman has woven his narrative around a few crucial artists and music-business figures, including Mr. Geffen. The stories of the Beatles and Motown, which have their own  books, are not retold.
Well-documented with facts and footnotes, Mr. Goodman's story is  essentially a sophisticated moral fable about the collision and fusion of art and commerce. Depending on the players, the alloy that results is sometimes sturdy, sometimes not. But except in the case of one artist, Neil Young, who is held up as an exemplar of quirky independence and integrity, the resulting product is  seen as tainted by commercial calculation and marketing savvy.
Early chapters on the music scene in Boston and Cambridge in the 1960's and early 70's and on the first nervous forays of Warner Brothers  Records into the rock marketplace offer illuminating pictures of the modern music business spontaneously inventing itself and improvising new interdependent networks of management and concert promotion. The book picks up steam with a gossipy portrait of Albert Grossman, the prototype of the high-powered  rock manager. Grossman, who died in 1986, insisted that his early folk-music clients like Peter, Paul and Mary have creative control over their recordings and that they be treated with the respect traditionally given serious artists.
By the mid-1960's, Grossman was the ponytailed king of a folk-music empire, presiding over the hippest (and one of the druggiest) of all rock salons, the circle surrounding Bob Dylan. Grossman and his star client eventually split over money. But at  least for a while the two enjoyed a remarkably creative symbiosis.
Having laid the historical groundwork, the book interweaves the stories of two of the most brilliant entrepreneurs to emerge in the 70's: Mr. Geffen and his sometime acolyte, Jon Landau. Mr. Geffen's rise from a college dropout working in the mail room of the William Morris Agency to a billionaire philanthropist, friend of Bill Clinton and out-of-the-closet gay man, is an extraordinary tale of personal and entrepreneurial self-invention, and it has never been told in print as fully as it is here. Mr. Landau, one of the few 70's rock critics to exercise real clout, made his fortune by proclaiming Bruce Springsteen ''rock-and-roll future'' and then contriving to manage Mr. Springsteen and help produce his albums, exercising a decisive  conceptual influence over his songwriting. Could any auteurist critic hope for more?
Where the author gives a generally thumbs-up approval to both men for being enlightened, artistically sensitive managers, their Machiavellian maneuvers are also duly noted. Mr. Geffen's bitter clashes with Mr. Young over whether his often eccentric records were sufficiently commercial during the singer's troubled tenure on Geffen Records are recounted to illustrate the strain between art and commerce when the art loses sight of a mass audience.
Mr. Geffen and Mr. Landau emerge as farsighted visionaries in comparison with several others. The book's most flagrant example of managerial myopia is Dee Anthony, whose eagerness to cash in quickly on his client Peter Frampton's mass success in the mid-70's led to Mr. Frampton's overexposure and his being cast in a career-damaging movie, ''Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts  Club Band.''
If ''The Mansion on the Hill'' has a moralistic outlook, its tone is calm, its portraits scrupulously balanced. And rare for a book of this kind, the musical analysis is as astute as the  business reporting.
The book is filled with juicy stories of the wheeling and dealing, shoving matches and coups that make the hurly-burly of the record industry a diverting spectator sport, once you know the players. Beneath its corporate facade, the music business is  still a traveling circus of rags-to-riches dreamers and crazy egomaniacs jostling one another in their insatiable quest for gold.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
From the band's first album, ''Boy,'' in 1980, through ''The Joshua Tree'' in 1987, U2 sounded inspired. Now it sounds expensive. The album is as much a product of its producers -- Flood, Howie B. and Steve Osborne -- as it is of U2, a band that sounds too scared to be itself. After all, on the band's last album, ''Zooropa,'' which was in many ways more of a techno funk fest than ''Pop'' is, the best song was the one sung not by U2 but by Johnny Cash.
It's not that U2 is wrong for not waving flags and concocting anthems anymore. After all, the Rolling Stones always hopped on to passing trends, and David Bowie is using jungle dance beats now. But these two usually do it well. U2 and techno don't mix any better than U2 and irony do.
Beginning with the ''Zooropa'' tour, U2 has used irony as a safe way to act like a pop star in front of a rock audience that has grown distrustful of the ego, excess and glamour of the 70's and 80's. U2 acknowledges this in ''The Playboy Mansion,'' with lyrics making fun of superstars who have fallen back to earth, like Michael Jackson and O. J. Simpson. In songs like ''Miami'' and ''Discotheque,'' U2 continues its commentary on American pop culture with lyrics like, ''You know you're chewing bubble gum/You know what that is but you still want some.''
Of course, using American pop culture as an all-purpose metaphor is nothing new for U2 (see ''Elvis Presley and Me'' on ''The Unforgettable Fire''), nor is its use of dance beats (from the beginning, danceable new-wave was an intrinsic part of U2's sound).
But fortunately, ''Pop'' isn't just about pop: over half the songs mention the sun, with Bono reaching for its mystery and brightness at his own peril.
Elsewhere, the familiar U2 theme of a believer searching for his God appears. The subtext of ''Pop'' is in the lyric ''Looking for baby Jesus under the trash.'' Beneath the expensive gloss and easy irony of ''Pop'' is a great band struggling to come out. Just skip the first three songs when listening to ''Pop'' and listen to U2 reach up from the murk of overwrought innovation for transcendence in simpler ballads like ''If God Will Send His Angels,'' ''Gone'' and ''Staring at the Sun,'' the album's most brilliant song, musically and lyrically.
As Bono sings in another strong cut, ''Wake Up Dead Man,'' ''Listen over the rhythm that's confusing you.''
Live
Where U2 is trying its best not to be pinned down on ''Pop,'' on ''Secret Samadhi'' the Pennsylvania band Live is trying its hardest to pin down a U2 formula. The country's current No. 1 album, ''Secret Samadhi'' (Radioactive) has the sincerity, the moralism, the religion and the conviction that U2 no longer likes to wear on its sleeve.
Perhaps albums like ''Secret Samadhi'' are why U2 now values irony. The album is sheer triteness. It is the exact converse of ''Pop'': the good stuff is on the surface -- heavy, dense guitar dirges trying to stifle a singer bellowing as if he has just seen his latest therapy bill. And beneath the surface is a rising tide of cliches threatening to submerge the whole album.
''Secret Samadhi'' is completely one-dimensional: never varying in its use of bad rhymes (beginning with ''let's go hang out in a mall or a morgue/A smorgasbord''), its forced allusions (from Henry Miller to St. Peter) and its insistence on singing shallow thoughts as if they had deep significance. Whereas U2 fails at self-parody, Live fails at avoiding it.
CRITIC'S CHOICE/Pop CD's
He surprised himself by surprising his drum kit. He would attack the high-hat from underneath instead of on top; he raised his sticks high and whacked them down in the middle of his tom-toms, making big, round explosions. When he clotted the flow with these unsubtle gestures, he would work out a solution: sometimes he simply left the cymbals alone for a long while, beating his raft of drums only on the song's melody accents.
The guitarist Jerry Hahn paid more attention to chord changes than the rest of the band's soloists, but he was a texturist as well, making his lines melt and curdle. Ron Miles, the trumpeter, played cool miniatures, putting the friction of slow motion on the rhythms. The set worked through all different manner of material, from Mr. Miles's stark Americana to the tenor saxophonist Fred Hess's skewed-harmony be-bop to unusual cover choices (Miles Davis's haunting ''Mademoiselle Mabry'' was one).
The band could also burn. On ''The Method,'' a sunny Colemanesque gallop written by Mr. Hahn, the leader and Mr. Miles entered a rushing, euphoric dialogue, reaching the evening's peak. The Denver Jazz Quintet -- it hasn't yet been recorded -- continues through Sunday night at Iridium, 48 West 63d Street, Manhattan.
JAZZ REVIEW
Mr. Bell also excelled in the Sonata in D minor for Solo Violin by Eugene Ysaye, the teacher of his teacher. As music, this rhapsodic work with its dreamy episodes, driving dance rhythms and virtuosic flights, doesn't amount to much. But Mr. Bell's palpable involvement and command were affecting.
Less successful was the performance of Beethoven's ''Kreutzer'' Sonata. The playing abounded in energy, imagination and, in the finale, nimble technique. But the passage work was often more coloristic than thematic and the sonata's colossal structure never came through clearly. They were both in their element again in Ravel's ''Tzigane.'' For once, this shameless show piece, with its Gypsy violin high jinks, sounded boldly compositional.
ANTHONY TOMMASINI
MUSIC REVIEW
There was a similar development, perhaps not unconnected, in James Morris's singing as Wotan. He came on with his characteristic tone in good shape: grave and well made, with a hint of harshness that usefully implies something weak behind the mask of divine majesty. But his vibrato was undermining his power beyond his control, until, in his final monologue, he hit his best form.
Choices for casting ''The Ring'' at this level are not enormous, and Mr. Morris found himself renewing acquaintance with many familiar colleagues. Ekkehard Wlaschiha's Alberich is a classic. He probably dispenses with more of the notes each time he sings the role, but his grating speech-song goes nicely with the orchestra and vividly conveys a mean, grasping spirit.
Birgitta Svenden, with her broad and rich singing, gave every justification for her status as empress of current Erdas, and Graham Clark repeated his brilliant Loge. Especially when Mr. Clark is about, one has to regret that Wagner stifled Loge's naughtiness and irony in the later operas of the cycle. The ride of the Valkyries and Siegfried's sword-forging would be very different scenes if they were able to include this singer as he was here: twinkling and alert, skipping about the stage, and pronouncing the words with clarity and actorly address.
Of the other gods, Froh was beautifully sung by Mark Baker, who managed to sound easy and gentle even while projecting an impressive volume, and there was a splendid Donner from Alan Held. Singing lustily but also with care and attention, he proudly sustained his crucial place at the end of the opera. Hei- Kyung Hong sang prettily as Freia; Hanna Schwarz had trouble holding pitch as Fricka.
The excellent giants were Rene Pape and Stephen West. Mr. Pape used his light and expressive bass to such affecting ends, and portrayed so evidently good a character, that any sensible Freia would have been perfectly happy to settle down with him -- except that Mr. West's grimmer tone was making it very clear where any contest between the brothers would lead.
Dennis Petersen as Mime sounded very human and much put-upon, and there was a neat trio of contrasting sensualities among the Rhinemaidens: Joyce Guyer, Jane Bunnell and Wendy White.
''Das Rheingold'' will be repeated tomorrow at 2 P.M. with the same cast. There will also be performances, with some cast changes, on April 25 and May 5.
OPERA REVIEW
Bach's wedding cantata ''Weichet Nur, Betrubte Schatten'' gave her a little more trouble on occasion, but she remained buoyant through to the final gavotte. In both works she was beautifully partnered by the oboe playing of Frank de Bruine. The Baroque oboe is one of the great discoveries of the ''authentic'' movement: a softer, woodier, more plaintive instrument than its successors of the 19th and 20th centuries, and here was a player who made its wonderful sounds into wonderful phrases.
Equally natural and spontaneous in effect was the solo violin playing of Andrew Manze, whether in the Bach cantata, in the polonaise of Handel's E minor Concerto Grosso (Op. 6, No. 3) or in Bach's A minor Violin Concerto. Mr. Manze showed how the virtues of period style, in terms of clarity and speed of articulation, can be used to draw lines that take regular rhythm as a jumping-off point. He tugged the meter, always musically, and his fellow musicians were with him. He is also no puritan about vibrato, which he will sometimes use generously to gild important notes.
In the Bach concerto, the academy followed Mr. Manze's unimposing lead; the other works were conducted by Mr. Hogwood. The performances all through, though, sounded like chamber music. Susan Sheppard supplied an athletic cello line to one of the arias in the Bach cantata.
MUSIC REVIEW
He died only a year ago, a rebel in retrograde who found distinction not by charging ahead but by husbanding the past. Einem is a good listener. His music does not copy Mahler or Puccini or early Stravinsky, but it shares their society and hears as they do. ''The Visit'' is less a number opera than a theater piece that rides on continuously moving music. That the orchestra pit does  more interesting things than the stage may reflect the willingness of vocal lines to serve words rather than function on their own behalf.
Einem introduces his 10 scenes with rumbling timpani or droning held notes. Ominousness is promised but not always delivered. The composer finds his own voice in the opera's demanding theatrical moment: Alfred Ill's church visit to his priest. Here again power originates in the pit.
''The Visit of the Old Lady'' concerns Claire Zachanassian, a wildly rich woman who, mistreated in her youth by citizens of a depressed Central European town, returns in middle age to have her revenge. She will give to her place of birth one billion marks in exchange for the death of Alfred Ill. For convenience's sake, she has brought along a coffin.
Ill, now a merchant, had in his youth made Claire pregnant, abandoned her for more comfortable marriage prospects, rigged legal proceedings against her, and driven her indirectly into prostitution. Townspeople wrestle with Claire's proposal, moral indignation gradually giving way to wider and wider eyes. What gives Durrenmatt's premise substance are the ambiguities: lethal hatred alongside enduring love, ethical repugnance mixed with daydreams of ill-gotten prosperity.
The City Opera's production in Norman Tucker's English translation, a premiere for the company, elaborates on Durrenmatt's surreal touches: Claire's collection of prosthetic limbs (she has survived a plane crash), her entourage of past and present husbands, her beefcake attendants, the happily servile duo of Koby and Loby, castrated and blinded for their false testimony against her. JoAnne Akalaitis's direction, along with Pawel Cheda's choreography, retain the tone with ritual gesture and spastic little dance steps. Bright yellow shoes become the sign of promised prosperity. Hotel easy chairs find themselves in wooded settings. The carved initials of the two lovers survive, outsize and glowing in red neon.
Joyce Castle almost has Claire's measure, though her presence and vocal power are not always enough. Brent Ellis's wavering baritone creates a stolid Alfred Ill. Michael Hayes sings strongly as the Mayor. George Manahan, his orchestra and chorus do competently by Einem's music. In its bleak and curious way, ''The Visit'' revisits the Aztecs, reviving questions of human sacrifice for the collective good. That is powerful stuff, more powerful perhaps than the opera we have here.
THE VISIT OF THE OLD LADY
Opera in three acts by Gottfried von Einem; libretto by Friedrich Durrenmatt, based on his play of the same name, English version by Norman Tucker; conductor, George Manahan; directed by JoAnne Akalaitis; sets by Marina Draghici; costumes by Gabriel Berry; lighting by Jennifer Tipton; choreography by Pawel Cheda. Performed by the New York City Opera at the New York State Theater.
WITH: Joyce Castle (Claire Zachanassian), Brent Ellis (Alfred Ill), Michael Hayes (Mayor), James Maddalena (Priest) and Kimm Julian (Schoolmaster).
OPERA REVIEW
In many ways, that's what Mr. Cockburn's songs are like. Though most of the wars, travels, loves and beliefs they chronicle are long past, the songs remain as potent as ever. Every now and then a previously concealed lyric leaps out of the brambles with a sharp, pointed idea.  These songs are still effective partly because Mr. Cockburn hasn't had great success outside Canada, though he has built a cult following over the course of 23 albums. So his best-known songs, like ''If I Had a Rocket Launcher,'' and his best lyrics, like the line in ''Mozambique''  describing a trip through the country as ''passing through sculpture'' where ''war is the artist,'' haven't been neutralized through overuse.
On Saturday night, Mr. Cockburn flitted from the personal to the political, from his belief in a selfless God to his despair at selfish humanity. If his ambitions were grand, his style was understated. He delivered his lyrics in an ordinary voice that hovered somewhere between singing and talking. And his guitar playing was, as usual, accomplished. Without resorting to the colorful frills or the theatrical austerity of other virtuoso guitarists, he simply picked soft, flawless acoustic solos, playing rhythm and lead at the same time and occasionally, for atmosphere, kicking a rack of chimes on his left.
Sometimes Mr. Cockburn's music suffered from formalism and humorlessness, and the line between editorial and song has long since blurred for him, but he remains one of the few musicians able to balance his role of artist and messenger in a decade when pop musicians often do their journeying on their therapist's couch.
NEIL STRAUSS
IN PERFORMANCE
And for good reason. Mr. Guines is a patriarch of the conga; he hasn't played in the United States in some 30 years. Changuito helped invent the songo style in Cuba and was instrumental in introducing the drum kit to popular Cuban music. And Mr. Hidalgo, the next generation, plays almost impossibly fast.
The set took off with a duet between Changuito and Mr. Hidalgo, both playing conga drums. They set tempos and rhythms and melodies, and then one of them held it all together while the other soloed. They goaded each other; Mr. Hidalgo's shudders of sound were square and solid. Changuito's playing was less geometric and warmer, and the audience gave the two a standing ovation.
PETER WATROUS
JAZZ REVIEW
More than with most composers, it seems, Mr. Kancheli's music requires a great performance to make its effect, and it got one here. The strings, in their inexorable, thumping march, and the brasses, in their Stravinskian, even Varesian, outbursts, supplied a feast of tone color, which Mr. Welser-Most served up in painstakingly balanced, exquisitely gauged courses.
Michael Steinberg, in a characteristically erudite program note, quotes Mr. Kancheli as to the sort of silence his piece needs. (Not ''formal'' or ''intellectual'' silence, but a ''silence that's accompanied by some sort of 'letting go,' some kind of attention, expectation.'') With New York audiences, any such appeal, let alone the fine distinctions, is to laugh or, more accurately, to cough.
The Saint-Saens concerto aspires to little more than a strenuous workout for the soloist and a melodious, invigorating jaunt for listeners. Truls Mork, a young Norwegian cellist who is capable of much more, fully met its virtuosic demands, lending the performance a certain significance through the sheer sophistication and patrician quality of his playing. If his intonation occasionally soared a bit over the top, it seemed somehow in keeping: an extension of this gregarious work's overgenerosity of spirit.
Mr. Welser-Most had previously shown a fine command of Sibelius, notably in recent performances of the First Symphony in Philadelphia. Here in the Second Symphony, as there, he fairly reveled in early moments of formlessness, making the ultimate laserlike coherence all the more compelling.
But the evolution seemed incomplete in terms of sheer concentration and performance quality. An odd affliction, affecting intonation, ensemble and voicing, passed among the lower instruments, from bassoons through basses to tuba. Still, the total effect was powerful on Thursday and may well have become overwhelming by Saturday.
In the heat of the Sibelius, Mr. Welser-Most lost grip of his baton, which flew into the second violins, seemingly without drawing blood. The fiddlers passed it back.
Perversely, a listener could only ponder what might have happened instead in the now distant days of the big, bad Philharmonic, which so delighted in tormenting youthful maestros. Ah, blessed, hard-won civility.
MUSIC REVIEW
During the show's first half, the music was about the white heat of uncertainty and interplay. After a negligible introductory theme, the alto saxophonist Jesse Davis accelerated into perfectly balanced 16th notes, with full band support; as he developed his own melodic pattern within a modal structure, the whole band gradually melted away, and suddenly Mr. Davis began double-timing, the drummer Adonis Rose re-entering behind him with a completely new pulse.
Mr. Payton, too, delivered a few thrilling solos. A player of stunning heat, force and technique, he's out to impress and tests his mettle on incredible tempos, but there was also an intellectual rigor around the edges of his playing. The group concept was a balancing act: for a tense 20 minutes, at least one player was performing at full force and at least one other was performing minimally or not at all.
Then Mr. Cheatham took the stage, and youthful, battling vigor gave way to tenderness. Mr. Cheatham sang a few songs in a breathy voice, as courtly as a society-band singer of the 1930's; the greatest moments were the loaded pauses between his light-as-a-feather vocal delivery and his declarative, telegram-succinct trumpet choruses. On ''I've Got a Right to Sing the Blues,'' the two trumpeters had a beautiful duet in the New Orleans polyphonic style, making their phrases short, slow and eccentrically meaningful.
Mr. Payton's quintet will continue through the weekend at Iridium, 48 West 63d Street. Tonight and tomorrow night, Mr. Cheatham will be replaced by the trumpeter Clark Terry.
BEN RATLIFF
Music in Review
There were moments when the emphasis shifted. Gracefulness and patience overruled dramatic sleight of hand in his reading of Liszt's ''Gretchen,'' from the ''Faust'' Symphony; and there were surprisingly explosive moments in the Schubert Sonata. There were also peculiarities that for some listeners might border on mannerism, not least Mr. Shehori's penchant for moving between a rich, pedaled sound and an almost entirely dry articulation that gives the music an unusually tactile quality.
There were occasional misjudgments. The Scherzo of the Schubert Sonata and parts of the Liszt Scherzo and March were almost recklessly speedy, and a hair beyond Mr. Shehori's complete control. Yet even in these, he was able to make unusual voicing decisions. It is this balance of daredevil showmanship and pure musicality that the explains the lure of Mr. Shehori's playing.
ALLAN KOZINN
Classical Music in Review
Mr. Howlett brought four supporting characters with him, symbols of his intended audience coalition. There was Mr. Reality, who grunted better than he rapped, for hip-hoppers, and Keith Flint -- growling, making ghoul faces, wearing mascara -- for punk-rockers. A dancer stood in for techno fans and a guitarist for heavy-metal rockers.
The few words in the Prodigy's songs talk tough: ''Serial thriller, serious killer'' or ''I got the poison, I got the remedy.'' Mr. Howlett has decided that the communal dreamscapes of most electronica don't have the commercial potential of old-fashioned rock aggression, or at least rock's postures. But the real strength of his music is in its relentless, repetitive drive. On the Prodigy's albums, Mr. Howlett's machines generate an overpowering momentum, throbbing and chattering and blipping over a big beat. But onstage, he would set the beat in motion, pile up a layer or two of hooks, then stop as if he'd run out of material; after a while, he would start the same sequences again.
During the pauses, Mr. Reality tutored the crowd, exhorting, ''Show your appreciation'' and ''represent yourselves.'' When that grew redundant, he would hurl four-letter words or steal catch phrases from Doug E. Fresh and George Clinton. Mr. Flint's main job was to intone ''Firestarter,'' Prodigy's MTV-approved single, in his best Johnny Rotten imitation; the guitarist's T-shirt read ''666.'' All in all, it couldn't have been much hokier.
ROCK REVIEW
The group, which includes the trumpeter Ron Miles, the trombonist Curtis Fowlkes and the violinist Eyvind Kang, has performed this material many times since then. But as Tuesday's set suggested, it hasn't become any easier to translate it to the stage. In performance, its ethereal placidity sounded excessively benign and a little wan, and the band's brief solos, stemming from a few seesawing chords, were mostly flat and lifeless on arrival.
Mr. Frisell's solo guitar set, sandwiched between two quartet performances, was another matter; here, in his own sandbox, he could make placid music come alive. Except for one buzzing, distorted blues, he played a string of tunes that mined more chaste territory, including barbershop quartets and lullabies. There were long, improvised sections; he used on-the-spot digital overlays, which gave him room to unfold his ideas and react against another voice. The music was beautiful and nearly orchestral, and lingering reverb matched with a slow picking style created chords within chords within chords.
JAZZ FESTIVAL REVIEW
Could Conrad Susa's ''Transformations,'' of 1973 -- modernist in its black wit and inscrutability, and post-modernist in its eclecticism -- conceivably bear any relation to Monteverdi's ''Orfeo,'' of 1607, one of the earliest operas? In fact, Mr. Susa, who drew acclaim three years ago for his ''Liaisons Dangereuses'' in San Francisco, cites Monteverdi and ''Orfeo'' as his musical models for ''Transformations,'' and the later work's pointed and economical setting of text substantiates that notion.
What's more, a historical line from Monteverdi to Mozart became clear as one listened to ''The Tale of Orpheus'' (as the company's English version is styled), on Saturday evening, in anticipation of ''Cosi Fan Tutte,'' on Sunday evening. Perhaps no composer between those two M's was as skilled at intertwining voices, meanings and emotions in operatic ensembles and duets, though Monteverdi, in ''Orpheus,'' was at the beginning of his operatic development, and Mozart, in ''Cosi,'' at the summit.
All this and more, however, relegated Puccini's ''Madame Butterfly,'' on Saturday afternoon, to a sort of outsider status. (Not that gratefully teary listeners seemed to mind.) The decorative production by Colin Graham from 1992, revived by David Roth, not only failed to encourage thought beyond the luxuriant moment but positively resisted it. Yet it did partake of the other great unifying factor here: a star turn, by Marie Plette in the title role.
The single most compelling performance of the weekend came on Friday evening from Sheri Greenawald, in ''Transformations,'' where she played the troubled poet Anne Sexton, who was, a year before her suicide, Mr. Susa's collaborator in this haunting entertainment. Ms. Greenawald brought fine vocal attributes to her portrayal along with an appropriate, difficult mix of childlike wonder and world-weariness.
''Transformations'' is a swirling, captivating mix of Sexton's autobiography, fairy tale, social commentary and sheer incomprehensibility that recalls nothing so much as Virgil Thomson and Gertrude Stein's ''Four Saints in Three Acts.'' Its musical economy is all the more remarkable in that it was Mr. Susa's first opera.
Keith Warner afforded just the right whimsy to the staging, and the performance was in every respect the most consistent. Although the various groupings of the St. Louis Symphony in the pit were not uniformly admirable, the handful of players assembled here responded well to John DeMain's direction.
The other great star turns came from the veteran Richard Stilwell in ''Cosi,'' playing the scheming Don Alfonso with superbly nuanced cynicism, and from the relative youngster Gregory Turay, singing Orpheus with bright charm.
In Colin Graham's ''Orpheus'' production, Mr. Turay faced stiff competition, when the conductor, Anthony Rolfe Johnson, climbed to the stage and sang beside him as Apollo. Mr. Rolfe Johnson is an accomplished tenor, best known for his work in early music, and he was making his conductorial debut here. To precisely what effect, it was hard to tell, since he served mainly as a traffic cop, coordinating continuo groups of period instruments on either side of the stage and the St. Louis Symphony musicians in the pit.
Still, it cannot be said that he faced a lot of competition from his more experienced counterparts, Mr. DeMain aside. To these ears, the opening of ''Madame Butterfly'' has never sounded more hectic than Stephen Lord made it; nor has the ''Cosi'' Overture ever sounded squarer than under Richard Bradshaw.
In any case, Mr. Rolfe Johnson sang well in a suitably fatherly fashion. And he showed Mr. Turay a few tricks of inflection, although the younger singer in no way suffered from the close comparison.
Of the younger performers in David William's production of ''Cosi,'' Patricia Risley was the most appealing, as Dorabella. Mr. William's stage direction, Teresa Przybylski's  design and Andrew Porter's English translation all enhanced Mr. Stilwell's tour de force, which closed the weekend on a note of exalted world-weariness similar to that with which it had started.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
Here is one of the most beguiling recordings to come along in a while. The program -- Copland's Sonata and Nocturne, Ives's Sonata No. 4, Piston's Sonatina and Mr. Baker's ''Blues'' -- offers a delightful blend of wit, lyricism, wistfulness and vivacity, and the two musicians add their own seasoning of flavorful ingenuousness. Here is music that streams freely from the American consciousness in playing that flows as surely from the heart.
With Piston's sunny sonatina, which opens the disk, Ms. Meyers immediately demonstrates the idiomatic character and high technical standard that stamp her playing throughout. Her perky, propulsive reading skips merrily over Mr. Schub's effervescent subtext.
Copland's big sonata, elegant of construction and radiant even in its darkness, forms the album's centerpiece. Ms. Meyers's fluid yet cleanly articulated and spiritually hardy account draws sparkling support from the keyboard. Likewise, the violin's pliant line and Mr. Schub's fine sense of harmonic movement make for a bittersweet view of the nocturne.
The duo's forthright treatment of Ives's sonata plays straight into its acerbic, nose-thumbing mischievousness without missing its gentleness, and Mr. Baker's ''Blues'' sets a droll cap on this vibrantly recorded program.
LAWRENCE B. JOHNSON
NO MORE
Classical Briefs
Mr. Delgado knows how to build pressure. On tune after tune, the breaks, and all the different textural combinations -- voices against drums, voices against piano figures -- piled up, pulling away from full boil, then moving toward the fire again. Mr. Delgado is an amiable singer with a hard-swinging sense of time disguised under a cool facade. And when he broke into improvisation, he told stories that were simple enough, often in rhyme and often using the complicated Havana wordplay, about New York or enjoying oneself. He was introducing the new sound of Havana to an audience that has rarely heard it, and the music clearly works here.
DLG, a local band that has changed the sound of New York salsa, with reggae and hip hop mixed in, opened the concert. Its record ''DLG'' (Sony), produced by Sergio George, is one of the few that successfully challenge the Cuban innovations. In concert, it's more of a pop band than a dance band. Its access to the profundities of the groove are limited, and though the band's material is extremely well written, in the sun on a hot Sunday afternoon, the groove and musicianship wins, not radio play.
The score: Havana 1, New York 0.
JAZZ FESTIVAL REVIEW
The unveiling of the statue in 1921 is the basis for the epilogue of ''The Mother of Us All.'' The main body of the opera, which was completed in  1947, is anchored in the 19th century. Susan B., as she is called, goes in and out of focus amid a host of other characters, fictional and actual (though sometimes anachronistic), including Daniel Webster, John Quincy Adams, Ulysses S. Grant and even the opera's creators.
The opera is itself a heartfelt if quirky monument, not only to Anthony but also, on Thomson's part, to Stein, who died in 1946, with her libretto complete and his music unbegun. Thomson weaves Gertrude S. into the plot as she had done Virgil T.
To a greater extent than with their earlier opera, ''Four Saints in Three Acts,'' which was presented at the Lincoln Center Festival last summer, ''The Mother of Us All'' sustains a narrative thread, as Anthony debates, cajoles and meditates. Yet it is less a series of reflections than a view through a distorting lens or, more accurately, a prism, with colors glinting in every direction. Stein's text, for all its manic discontinuities, achieves a remarkable logic and potency through Thomson's sly simplicities.
To the extent, at least, that it can be understood. Comprehension may be even more crucial where meaning is allusive and elusive than where it is literal, and since Thomson did a superb job of enhancing rather than obstructing the text, this is where the performers come in.
Baltimore's young cast was as uneven in this respect as in vocal quality. Elizabeth Jackson easily held the center as Susan on Thursday, and other notable performances came from Robert Baker as Jo the Loiterer (based on a Stein acquaintance), Patricia Wulf as Susan's young companion Anne, and Kyle Engler as Indiana Elliot (who marries Jo). However odd it may seem to criticize David Neal for his height, and however well he sang, he was unconvincing as the pixieish Thomson.
Much of the orchestral playing, especially in the brasses, was insecure or worse, perhaps because the conductor, Richard Cordova, was holding the musicians back in a lively acoustic. Even at that, with some indifferent enunciation, a lot of words were lost.
Sandra Bernhard's direction and Tom Macie's sets generally made sensible use of an overwide stage, installing an inner proscenium area that doubled as a projection screen. But in the epilogue and especially the prologue, Ms. Bernhard used areas too widely separated for the action and text to cohere. Tennis, anyone?
For the rest, Ms. Bernhard served the work well, providing (when Donald Edmund Thomas's effective lighting could keep pace) striking stage pictures. Whatever the merits of the real statue of Anthony (by Adelaide Johnson), Ms. Bernhard's reimagination of it was most evocative.
MUSIC REVIEW
The subject of Nazi culture and, especially, Nazi music is much in the wind these days. Ronald Harwood's play ''Taking Sides,'' with Daniel Massey's brilliant portrayal of Furtwangler under postwar inquiry, arrived in New York last year, while musicologists were trying to de-Nazify Bruckner's symphonies, ridding them of a spurious grandiosity allegedly acquired at the hands of Nazi editors and interpreters.
And ''Palestrina,'' a 1917 opera by Hans Pfitzner, who grumbled yet coped through the Third Reich as through the rest of his career, arrives at the Lincoln Center Festival on Monday in the wake of two recent books, ''The Twisted Muse: Musicians and Their Music in the Third Reich,'' by Michael H. Kater, and a biography of the Nazi diva Elisabeth Schwarzkopf, by Alan Jefferson.
The issues involved have a perennial fascination: when art is put to the uses of an evil state, how should artists respond? Should one flee or stand one's ground? If one stays, may resistance be covert rather than overt? For that matter, is it possible to stand aside altogether and remain ''only'' an artist, blamelessly immersed in a lofty pursuit that transcends the everyday and the political, however horrific? These issues take on a particular poignance just now, as the world of ''serious'' music, finding itself increasingly marginalized in its ivory-tower pursuit of abstraction, tries desperately to reconnect with the ''real'' world.
In the Third Reich, many were forced to flee for their survival. Among those who remained, opportunism if not true belief was rife, punctuated by isolated stories of quiet humanitarianism and even heroism.
Alas, the Bel Canto video (distributed by Allegro, of Portland, Ore.), virtually devoid of commentary, sheds little new light on such matters. The facts it documents are already well known, though there is, to be sure, a visceral impact in actually seeing Karajan lead the Berlin Philharmonic in occupied Paris in 1940 or 1941, and Furtwangler lead it in a concert for wounded soldiers and workers in an AEG factory in 1942 before a backdrop of swastikas.
In perhaps the most jarring segment, the uniformed Goebbels segues from a homily on the reopening of an opera house into Bohm's ''Meistersinger'' performance by leading the audience in shouts of ''Sieg Heil!'' But in this case, the program's supposed focus on conductors seems forced and arbitrary, for the Nazi-sympathizer Bohm, ensconced in the pit, is never seen.
Some of the material seems almost silly in this grim context. Whatever offenses Max von Schillings may have committed before his death in July 1933 (and they were real), why spend 10 of the tape's 53 minutes on a performance of the ''William Tell'' Overture with the Berlin State Opera Orchestra from 1932 or 1933, possibly before Hitler even took power in January 1933?
And the interest in Blech's 1933 performance of the ''Meistersinger'' Prelude with the same orchestra, frenzied in parts but elegant in its string portamentos, is more musicological than politically prurient. Blech, who was Jewish, was barred from re-entering Germany during a 1937 tour.
Worse, the documentation is scant and inconsistent. A 16-page ''expose'' by Frederic Spotts, the author of ''Bayreuth: A History of the Wagner Festival,'' gives sketchy background on the period, the music and the performers. But neither the booklet nor the tape identifies the newly reopened opera house of the Bohm segment. (It was the Stadtische Oper, or Municipal Opera, in Berlin, newly renamed the Deutsches Opernhaus. Furtwangler also conducted ''Die Meistersinger'' to open an opera house in 1935, in Nuremberg, with Hitler present.)
Or rather, the film may identify the house, but not as it has been tailored to fit the video screen. Here, as elsewhere, the top of the picture seems to have been lopped off, and when a (mostly illegible) program flyer is shown, the lower edges of large letters dip tantalizingly into view, to no avail.
Other defects and distortions are many but hardly surprising in view of the age and rarity of the material. Blech's facial features are lost in a ghostly wash, and the microphone never quite catches up to Furtwangler in his headlong surge to the end of the Beethoven Ninth (with the Berlin Philharmonic on Hitler's birthday in 1942).
The best source of information about conductors and other musicians in the Third Reich is now Mr. Kater's book, dense with facts, many of them newly unearthed. Although the video serves in small part as a useful supplement, viewers who go to it cold will gain no clear notion of an infinitely complex subject. Sensation-seekers, too, will be disappointed. Left to speak for themselves, most of these fragments communicate little but musical eloquence.
VIDEO VIEW
He's not above platitudes -- ''Grab the key, unlock the door/Then you'll know what life is for'' -- but his real calling is to construct well-turned pop songs, complete with uplifting  choruses, ''bits in the middle'' and extra twists at the end. Even if he's mired in gloom, there's a tune to hold on to.
While younger bands like Oasis have built entire careers on a handful of Beatles songs, Mr. Wallinger clearly knows the full catalogue, and he doesn't share Oasis' arrogance or their taste for penetrating noise. World Party harks back to the human-scale, handmade sound of the mid-1960's, with touches of country and skiffle; it was the moment in rock just before guitar sounds turned gargantuan.
To Mr. Wallinger, like other fans of a certain age, it's the natural way for rock to sound, and he and World Party lavish their craftsmanship on making the music seem unstudied.
ROCK REVIEW
The show was big, without a moment of introspection. Ms. Nazario had 10 dancers come out to dance occasionally, and even on ballads she aimed for the back of the hall. She brought out a medley of plenas, songs from Puerto Rico, and it had the audience on its feet, waving Puerto Rican flags. It's soap opera elegance, a pop extravagance, and on that level Ms. Nazario's show was successful.
FESTIVAL REVIEW/MUSIC
The Lilith Fair -- named for the Goddess of $3 Bottled Water and featuring Sarah McLachlan, Tracy Chapman, Joan Osborne, Fiona Apple and the Cardigans -- felt similarly genderless. It seemed like a strong tour of pop singers who happened to be women. If there was any similarity in the esthetic of all the singers (most of them played honest, confessional mixtures of folk, rock and pop), it was not because they were women but because of the taste of Ms. McLachlan, who organized the tour. Interestingly, besides Ms. Chapman's bassist, all  the musicians backing these female singers and songwriters were male.
Until Ms. Chapman went on stage near the end of Friday night, the audience watched each act listlessly. Conversations around the second stage -- which featured the French lounge-pop of Autour de Lucie, the sweet, idiosyncratic folk of Victoria Williams and the romantically confused  indie-rock of Juliana Hatfield -- tended to be about trying to figure out who the performers were.
''Have you ever heard of Juliana Hatfield?'' began one.
''I think she used to be in the Juliana Hatfield Three.''
''Was she the one with the big glasses?''
''That's Lisa Loeb.''
The Swedish pop band the Cardigans received no more attention, until they played their last song and biggest hit, ''Lovefool,'' when it suddenly dawned on the audience who they were. Ms. Apple and Ms. Osborne, who followed, both chastised the audience for its indifference. Both also turned in strong sets, with the 19-year-old Ms. Apple's awkward and immature stage presence countered by her rich, self-assured voice and piano-playing. Ms. Osborne played so many new, unreleased songs that when she asked the audience if she could perform another, an overwhelming majority yelled ''No!'' Backed by the tentative scratching of a disk jockey, her new songs ranged from the long, melismatic wails she has picked up from her recent lessons in Sufi devotional music to blazing, bluesy psychedelia to streamlined pop. She ended her set with ''One of Us'' rearranged for the three cellos of the group Rasputina.
In terms of crowd response, Ms. Chapman, who has resuscitated a career based on sociopolitical folk songs with a pop hit about a relationship (''Give Me One Reason''), stole the show from Ms. McLachlan, adding a powerful Cream-style coda to  that hit and tacking extra didgeridoo solos onto ''New Beginning.''
Ms. McLachlan focused on songs from her first album in three years, ''Surfacing'' (Arista), which entered the Billboard pop charts at No. 2 this week. ''I feel so great about singing really depressing songs,'' she told the audience, beginning a set of atmospheric pop topped by her rich, expressive soprano. But new songs like ''Angel'' and ''Building a Mystery'' (with a chord progression similar to Ms. Osborne's ''One of Us''), were less about depression than yearning, which seemed like a good way to end a concert that was originally conceived as a reaction against sexism in the concert industry.
Now the festival has become the most successful package tour so far this summer. So what has it proved? That female singers could draw big audiences? They always could. Most likely, the Lilith Fair's gift to the future will be dozens of copycat tours directed at specific marketing niches, perhaps also with religious titles (by legend, Lilith was Adam's first wife): the Isaac Exposition, featuring all pre-pubescent bands like Hanson, Radish and the Stinky Puffs. Or the Methuselah Tour, with senior citizens like Chuck Berry, Les Paul and Ray Charles. The truth is that despite the Lilith Fair's good work, there hasn't been a time in recent memory that pundits were not trumpeting the year of the woman in music. It is only when no one finds it unusual or trendy or newsworthy that women are having pop successes that there will actually be musical equality between the sexes.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
The fault is not Lincoln Center's alone. In New York, a profoundly cross-cultural city, there isn't one concert hall built to accommodate the sound of drums and amplification, the sound of the 20th century. In popular music, the African element is essential. And the African influence in music, in part, is the drum. That the drum remains, this late in the century, banned for architectural, acoustic and technological reasons, is not a good sign.
Africa showed up in other ways as well. The Yoruban Santeria religion, and its attendant rhythms and world view, was made explicit in at least five of the concerts. And the urge to dance, to be part of the spectacle and not simply passive spectators, animated the audiences at most of the shows. That interaction between the audience and the musicians, back and forth all night long, was suppressed at Lincoln Center, and it was a gross misunderstanding of the communal experience of music in the New World.
At its best, the series examined the process with a wide-angle lens, using music that mixed class, race and religion. At times, it offered extraordinary performances by gifted improvisers, and in its Cuban night, brought previously forbidden music to Lincoln Center. It pointed out the exceptionally high level of adult artistic achievement in the Hispanic pop arena; there are few English-language equivalents to a Gal Costa or a Gilberto Santa Rosa. And it showed how the rumination over history and memory, over the experience in the Americas, is still a powerful endeavor; it can produce great art.
CRITIC'S VIEWS: Latin Pop
Still, the hall was sold out, the orchestra played superbly for Gerard Schwarz, the festival's music director, and the soloists -- the soprano Carol Vaness, the mezzo-soprano Frederica von Stade and the pianist Peter Serkin -- gave performances that elevated the proceedings. And fans of the festival can take solace in the fact that Lincoln Center has preserved the festival's better features (the free preconcert recitals and lectures, for example) while trying to freshen the series  with more intimate programs at Alice Tully Hall and a minifestival devoted to Mozart's relationship with Prague and its composers.
For opening night, though, the program was devoted to the tried and true, and was wholly (rather than mostly) Mozart. Mr. Schwarz began with the Symphony No. 34 in C (K. 338), a work that allowed him to show off the warmth of the orchestra's string sound as well as the solidity of its winds and brass. Mr. Schwarz has always enjoyed pointing up dynamic contrasts in classical and Baroque music, and if he has become more subtle than he was in his early years on the podium, he remains attentive to the effect a sudden shift in volume can have and lets few coloristic opportunities pass.
More striking than these manipulations, though, was the ensemble's liveliness and precision in the fast movements, not only in the symphony but also throughout the program. A suitably dramatic account of the ''Cosi Fan Tutte'' Overture introduced the arias and duets from the opera, including an affecting account of ''Come scoglio'' from Ms. Vaness and a persuasively characterized reading of ''Smanie implacabili'' from Ms. von Stade.
In their duets, ''Ah, guarda, sorella'' and ''Prendero, que brunettino,'' they complemented each other perfectly, and they were fully supported by the orchestra, which is also a crucial if often overlooked player in Mozart's operas.
After the intermission, Mr. Serkin joined the orchestra for the Concerto No. 21 in C (K. 467). He often seems to want to reach beyond the abilities of the piano, and in the arialike slow movement, whenever he reached the sustained notes that come at the peaks and ends of phrases, he moved his finger on the key as if he were playing vibrato on a string instrument. I've never been able to make my piano work that way, and I doubt that Mr. Serkin's does either, but there is something to be said for the power of visual suggestion. If an actual vibrato was not created, the intention was certainly conveyed.
Mr. Serkin also played his own cadenzas, which expanded inventively on Mozart's themes and ventured into some interesting chromatic thickets while keeping within the bounds of Mozartean style.
MUSIC REVIEW
Most of the instruments had less in common with, say, a flute or a drum than with some of the sound installations one might find at a downtown art gallery or at an electronic music concert. Most, in fact, were really only triggers for computer programs. In most cases, once an instrument was stroked or struck, it sent an impulse to the computer, which sent sounds of its own to a set of nearby speakers.
Joshua Fried's computer, for example, was connected to four shoes. Laetitia Sonami, a French composer, wore a glove that was wired to detect motion, which yielded eerie melodies. In ''Hexa'' (1988), Anita Feldman's tap dancers performed with, and as part of a score by Lois V. Vierk. Perhaps the most conventional performance was a lively concert by Bakra Barta, a steel drum band from Seattle.
In the evening, the festival presented two concerts of new music. The instrumentation was conventional, if again abetted by computers, but the spirit of the homemade instrument installations prevailed.
The first concert, by Pauline Oliveros and her Deep Listening Band, began with Stuart Dempster's ''JDBBBDJ'' (1987), in which Mr. Dempster walked through the audience with an experimental brass didjeridu, an Aboriginal hornlike instrument that produces a vibrant, exotically textured lowing sound. In Ms. Oliveros's own ''Sound Fishes'' (1992), gentle wisps of sound grew into a rich, colorful fabric that made effective use of a surround-sound speaker arrangement, and David Gamper's ''Deep Hockets'' (1994) was a bit more sugary, but also more rhythmically vital.
The centerpiece of the program was the premiere of Joe McPhee's four-movement, mostly improvisatory work, ''Unquenchable Fire'' (1997), for which Mr. McPhee and his quartet joined Ms. Oliveros's band. The work was inspired by Rachel Pollack's science fiction novel of the same title, and during the performance Ms. Pollack read several colorful passages, including one in which tourists from Cleveland encounter a talking horse in Central Park and scoop up some of its manure as a souvenir, and another in which a kind of utopia is created in a fiery subway car. Mr. McPhee's free jazz score was equally fanciful, as was his trumpet and saxophone playing.
The closing concert was devoted to a dance work, ''Icho: Solitary Butterfly.'' Molissa Fenley's choreography combined classical movement with some of her own angular trademarks, and was danced evocatively by Felicia Norton. The score, by Leroy Jenkins, was an eclectic journey: Mr. Jenkins's own idiosyncratic violin playing, performed live, was set against an amusing taped swirl of percussion, electronic sound and Dylan-style harmonica.
FESTIVAL REVIEW/MUSIC
The late 18th century was not much different, but Mozart did manage to escape Viennese politics in the wildly favorable receptions bestowed on him in Prague. ''Don Giovanni'' had its premiere there in 1787 and is in the international operatic repertory continuously to this day. There is also the ''Prague'' Symphony, which ended Friday's and Saturday's programs, performed by Adam Fischer and the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra at Avery Fisher Hall.
Festival programmers have been busy connecting Mozart mixes over these five days with big-name Czechs like Dussek (his B flat Two-Piano Concerto came on Saturday) and smaller fry called Vanhal, Kozeluh, Stich-Punto and Myslivecek. Performers have kept the connection going: Ivan Moravec played Mozart's D minor Piano Concerto on Friday; the Prazak String Quartet appears today. Mr. Fischer is from Budapest but learned conducting from the ubiquitous Hans Swarowksy (a good Viennese name, that).
The Mozart arias on Friday and Saturday -- ''Ah, lo previdi'' and ''Bella mia fiamma'' -- were Mozart's presentations to the Czech soprano Josefina Dusek. Sheri Greenawald, substituting for Amanda Roocroft, who was ill, sang them with big-boned, flat-out passion. Mr. Moravec was a delight: pristine, ringing sound; curious but pleasing ritards and diminuendos, and above all the blanket of calm that older players can bestow on roiling music.
Mr. Fischer's conducting ranged from adequate to chaotic. Both overtures -- to ''Don Giovanni'' and ''La Clemenza di Tito'' (another opera for Prague) -- were blurs of ill-defined string ensemble. The ''Prague'' Symphony on Friday was better prepared, but he had a hard time communicating the after-the-beat accents to his players.
The Dussek double concerto was probably a better piece in 1806. There is the composer's endearing fondness for the clarinet; the modulations are interesting, abrupt and unexpected. Yet the music translates poorly to modern instruments and halls.
No one, moreover, seemed to have much faith in it. If the ambling last movement went reasonably well, everything else was viscous to the point of incomprehensibility. The orchestra played carelessly; and when the big pianos played by Anthony and Joseph Paratore did emerge out of the goo, they swooned and drawled 1940's Hollywood style. Maybe a lot of good music is not meant to live on.
MUSIC REVIEW
Essentially a light lyric soprano, Ms. Huang is much better suited to Mozart. She brought bright tone and supple phrasing to ''L'amero saro costante,'' the sublime aria from the early opera ''Il Re Pastore,'' and to ''Voi avete un cor fidele,'' an elaborate aria Mozart wrote for inclusion in a production of an opera by Galuppi.
Yet there were trouble signs in Ms. Huang's singing. Her voice shimmers with vibrato on sustained notes, but sometimes the sound turns tight and edgy. In her lower range, the pitch can sharpen, usually an indication of forcing.
This may be the result of taking on a heavy role like Butterfly too soon. But she is a gifted and promising singer.
That Mozart was a savvy professional-for-hire was made clear by the festival music director, Gerard Schwarz, who conducted an ebullient overture to ''La Villanella Rapita,'' an opera by Mozart's contemporary Francesco Bianchi, followed by two extensive scenes composed by Mozart for a subsequent production of that same Bianchi opera. Here Ms. Huang was joined by the lyric tenor David Gordon, the robust bass Charles Austin, and, in his festival debut, the stentorian bass Kevin Deas.
The Cuban-born pianist Horacio Gutierrez was the soloist in Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 23. He is a fleet-fingered and elegant pianist. His playing had sparkle and fluidity but lacked incisiveness and definition.
Often phrases whizzed right by, trailing off at the end. In the Adagio, Mr. Gutierrez seemed intent on reminding us that this mournful movement is also a lilting siciliano, but the music is more disturbing and extraordinary than it sounded here.
Mr. Schwarz concluded with a shapely and stylish performance of Symphony No. 35 in D, the ''Haffner.''
MUSIC REVIEW
Take the four flutes of Ms. Gubaidulina's 1977 Quartet, one of the works included in the Tanglewood program. They start to talk to each other, at first with single notes and pairs, and gentle music begins to unfold. But this is not it. They start again, exactly as before, and a different musical path is taken. Eventually, after other stops, we arrive at what seems to have been the point: a blinding shriek such as one had not expected these instruments could be capable of.
Music like this needs patience. You have to be prepared to follow its fanciful, probably rather uneventful course in order to be there when the shock comes. Flutes turn angry. The players of the Third String Quartet suddenly pick up their bows, after several minutes of quiet pizzicatos. Four timpanists, in the percussion septet ''In the Beginning There Was Rhythm,'' thwack their instruments as loudly as possible and then turn the resonances into glissandos, like curling smoke, by means of the pedals.
Some works seem pure play. ''Quattro'' was one in this concert, a comedy of threats and alliances played out by two trombonists and two trumpeters, squaring up to each other as if they had been bristling animals in a cage. But elsewhere in Ms. Gubaidulina's music the games can imply much more, for it is in the nature of her simplicity that she can keep up high spirits when considering the spirit.
Some works, too, do not arrive at a moment of transformation but are intense all through, the example here being ''Rubaiyat'' for baritone and ensemble, well placed at the end of the concert. This setting of Persian poetry in Russian translation -- quite without musical orientalism, for Ms. Gubaidulina in her frankness sees through codes and conventions -- was strongly projected by a group of Tanglewood students under Reinbert de Leeuw, and the challenging solo part, covering the whole range of a countertenor's voice as well as a baritone's, was delivered by Brian Nickel with gripping authority and an excellent command of the language.
A note in the program suggested that the catalogue of personal griefs in the text could have had, in 1969, an autobiographical weight, since at that time Ms. Gubaidulina was battling official disapproval in the Soviet Union. But the work is more likely to have been meant as a portrait of the sorrowing Jesus, given a Persian disguise so as not to be recognized by the apparatchiks.
Mr. de Leeuw was back the next evening to conduct a full orchestra of Tanglewood's young musicians in thoroughly engaged performances of Henri Dutilleux's ''Metaboles'' and Christopher Rouse's Second Symphony. In the same concert Stefan Asbury conducted the first performance of Kevin Beavers's ''Sinfonia,'' a barnstormer rather in Mr. Rouse's manner, though more resolutely straightforward.
With these two composers insisting so much, it was good to be able to remember, from the start of the program, Steven Mackey's ''Eating Greens'' and its opposite qualities of orchestral imagination, compactness, elegance, charm, uproariousness and sense of humor, all exuberantly displayed under the baton of Daniel Harding.
MUSIC REVIEW
Or was it spontaneous? In its timing as in its texture, the whole affair had the feeling of a lowbrow sitcom. The responses seemed as closely and coldly manipulated as a laugh track, and one listener was left wondering what all those people could find so funny in the predictable pratfalls of such cartoonishly drawn characters.
True, the plot itself is not the subtlest, playing on politically charged stereotypes as the Bey of Algiers tires of his wife and fastens on the notion of an Italian inamorata. The wily and unwilling candidate he finds, Isabella, leaves him in his place, slumping with relief back into his wife's embrace. But Rossini's comedy is sly, relying more on cleverness and a keen eye for human foibles than on obvious calculation. His sensibility alternates pastel shades with bold earth tones.
Mr. Alden's comedy is little more than studied irreverence, with his treatment of the Bey's wife, Elvira, as a brazen hussy, and his introduction of semiautomatic rifles as comic props in the updated staging. Mr. Alden imposes garish colors and blinding lights both figuratively and literally, with the help of his designers (Carol Bailey and John Conklin, sets; Gabriel Berry, costumes, and Mark McCullough, lighting).
Rossini's delightful and spirited music is, of course, the only thing that has kept this work alive for almost two centuries. (How often have you heard Luigi Mosca's opera of five years before to the same libretto, by Angelo Anelli?) But here it is simply swamped by shtick, reduced to the level of soundtrack.
This despite some good efforts from the singers, most of whom were repeating their roles from Glimmerglass. Kenneth Tarver, as Isabella's real love, Lindoro, had perhaps the best moments along with a few awkward ones. Phyllis Pancella sang Isabella smoothly but tended to shade flat.
Kevin Glavin, as the butt of a bey, bulled his music around. Lisa Mandelkorn, as Elvira, was almost inevitably more appealing in her singing than in her character. George Manahan conducted a performance that left room for refinement, if that term has meaning in this crass context.
The City Opera may well have a hit on its hands, as inexplicable as such an outcome might appear to one viewer. But then those prime-time television ratings have never made much sense either.
OPERA REVIEW
William Byrd's ''Civitas Sancti Tui'' was especially stunning, in the purity of tone and compelling resonance on the words ''Sion deserta'' (''Sion, a desert'') first in the trebles, then in the basses. Thomas Weelkes's ''Alleluia, I heard a Voice'' was hardly less compelling in balance and equilibrium among the voices.
Other works in English were scattered about: Handel's ''Zadok the Priest,'' Purcell's ''The Word is a Lantern,'' with superb work from a trio of the older singers, and Britten's ''Festival Te Deum,'' with game solo piping from a younger boy.
But the program was highly varied. A few numbers from the chorus's new EMI recording, ''Credo,'' which is oriented toward Russia and Poland, included Stravinsky's little gem of an ''Ave Maria.''
Not everything worked equally well. The ''Cherubic Hymn'' from Rachmaninoff's Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom, needs at the outset a sound grounded in depth and shrouded in mystery. Here, even more than on the recording, the English choir's sound, clear-cut and lacking deep basses, seemed a bit flat-footed and straightforward.
Brahms's ''Es Ist das Heil,'' too, lacked a certain Germanic gravity and earthiness. Still, as with, say, the Vienna Philharmonic playing Shostakovich, if you're going to have the wrong sound, it might as well be a beautiful wrong sound.
In contrast, Arvo Part's ''Beatitudes'' was utterly unproblematic and gorgeous. Jesus' words, from the Gospel of Matthew, extol meekness and righteousness, and Mr. Part's identification appears total in settings of exquisite simplicity. An organ punctuates the reading with pedal tones, then flowers into ecstasy at the notion of heavenly reward before suddenly recalling the charge of humility.
The choir's young organist, Robert Quinney, was excellent here, as in two solo performances. In a Bach Toccata in C (BWV 564, missing the Adagio and Fugue Bach packaged with it) on the gallery organ, he made up for a few early slips with some nice improvisatory flourishes toward the end. And in Marcel Dupre's Prelude and Fugue in G minor (Op. 7, No. 3) on the great organ, he deftly filled the only real gap in the evening: sheer grandeur of sound to match its beauty.
MUSIC REVIEW
Barber's Piano Concerto evokes late German Romanticism and Bartok. It unfolds in a bracing weave of austerity and sultry songfulness, intensity and vaporous mystery. Mr. Parker's eloquent playing strikes just the right tone, at once urgent and a bit distant. Mr. Levi, who provides a deliciously indulgent backdrop to the Violin Concerto, supports the piano with aggressive, even acerbic accompaniment.
The ballet ''Souvenirs'' is Barber comfortable in robes that would have fit Tchaikovsky. It allows the Atlanta Symphony to unfurl streamers of luxurious sound.
LAWRENCE B. JOHNSON
It's a situation the band has abetted by putting out forgettable, single-plus-filler albums since ''Some Girls'' in 1978 or, at the latest, ''Undercover'' in 1983. The Stones' music is still carried by some of the best reflexes in rock: the tease-and-grapple guitars of Keith Richards and Ron Wood, the foursquare drive of Charlie Watts's drums, the vociferous dishevelment of Mick Jagger's vocals. But the songs ring hollow; no one expects to hear them in two years.
The pattern continues with ''Bridges to Babylon'' (Virgin), although it's a better than average edition of the album the Stones have been putting out with minor variations since 1986. There's slightly more effort in the songwriting, both words and melody, than there was on ''Voodoo Lounge'' in 1994. For one thing, Jagger seems to have realized that leering come-ons make him sound like a dirty old man, not a Casanova; he's more convincing as a spurned lover.
Between the lines, ''Bridges to Babylon'' insinuates thoughts of age, decay and death. In ''Out of Control,'' which echoes the Temptations' ''Cloud Nine'' and the Stones' own ''Heartbreaker,'' the singer recalls ''times long ago'' when he was young, foolish, angry, vain and lucky: ''Tell me how have I changed,'' he sings self-mockingly. ''Already Over Me'' finds some poignancy in a chorus that hints at Jagger's worries about his audience as well as the song's ostensible tale of a one-night stand. But just as often, as in ''Low Down,'' Jagger seems to be expanding small ideas by rote.
A few songs seek to recapture the old Stones' sense of menace. ''Flip the Switch,'' the rocker that opens the album, is a taunt from a man about to face the death penalty; Metallica would understand. The choppy, martial ''Gunface,'' with the singer threatening a woman who has turned out to be as dishonest as he is, might be the Stones' answer to the sociopathic narrators of Nine Inch Nails (who of course owe something to ''Midnight Rambler''). For ''Might as Well Get Juiced,'' about self-destruction, the Stones get traction in 1990's music, applying up-to-date distortion, pulsing synthesizer and the bass-heavy mixes of dance music to basic blues-rock.
Of the album's 13 songs, less than half may linger. There are tenacious pop choruses in ''Already Over Me'' (an updated ''Angie'') and in ''Anybody Seen My Baby?,'' which suggests the verse of Michael Jackson's ''Billie Jean'' and copies the chorus of K. D. Lang's ''Constant Craving'' (she shares songwriting credit). ''Flip the Switch'' and ''Might as Well Get Juiced'' could get by on their muscle. And two of the three songs with lead vocals by Keith Richards are passable genre efforts: reggae in ''You Don't Have to Mean It'' and soul in ''How Can I Stop.''
Elsewhere, the album is full of broadshouldered guitar riffs and unmistakable Stones interplay, like the staggered rhythm guitars in ''Low Down'' and the slide-guitar riffing of ''Too Tight.'' But professionalism can carry the songs only so far. Maybe for the tour in 2000, the Stones should put out a magnificent EP or an album filled out with hard-grooving instrumentals, instead of grinding out songs for an ever-growing scrapheap.
RECORDINGS VIEW
Similarly, Schoenberg's rescorings do not change -- except perhaps to intensify -- what is most Mahlerian in Mahler: the search for home (represented in the Schoenberg versions by the idealized domesticity of chamber music), the converse willingness to range through styles, textures or colors, and certainly the omnipresent subjectivity. This aspect is brought forward in ''The Song of the Earth'' because there is now no need for the singers to fight the accompaniment, so that the music is open to more lyrical and intimate kinds of projection.
The advantages were proved here in the performances of the two soloists, Annette Markert and Thomas Young. Ms. Markert has a full contralto richness, and once she had sung herself in, she was fluid as well as precise, and could reach with undiminished power into the bottom register. She sang with authority, and with dignity, and so did Mr. Young. He was no more inclined to relish the fun of his drinking songs than she was to reach for weepiness in her long adieu. His excellence was in pure singing -- in a voice so hot and bright it seemed to scorch you.
William Sharp, who sang the earlier cycle, hit bad luck, and there were some misfortunes, too, in the accompaniments to both works, played by members of the Orchestra of St. Luke's. Philippe Herreweghe, conducting, encouraged the musicians to enjoy their opportunities as soloists to put a personal light on the musical images, and thereby to make these scores exceedingly Schoenbergian as well as deeply Mahlerian. But this cascading, variegated music (Schoenbergian and Mahlerian at once, in that respect) could have done with an extra rehearsal.
MUSIC REVIEW
If the Debussy adopts a godly theme, ''Psyche,'' which the Philharmonic played at Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday night, is more of the flesh. Franck's ''symphonic poem'' is from Apuleius's telling of Cupid and Psyche, the myth in which earthly beauty ends up confounding the gods, Venus in particular.
How does eroticism translate into sound? Wagner, Scriabin and this particular piece indicate that surge and undulation are part of the answer. There is also a certain lack of control, the ear's surrender to forces outside the regulated barline and the firm pull of harmonic closure. Amorous music seems to drift invitingly, but we know not where.
Franck's piece, darkly colored yet glowing with warmth, sways and floats on a slowly moving tide. Sequences begin, then dissolve into unexpected modulations. Themes ooze upward chromatically and slide back the same way. Great tuttis appear suddenly and then back away, sometimes as climax, sometimes more like coitus interruptus. Any musical person in the mood for sex is going to respond to ''Psyche.''
Most of it, that is. The choruses, sung here by the New York Choral Artists, are drab and uninspired, as if they belonged to a different piece, if not a different composer. Cherry Jones spoke John Guare's eminently sensible English narrations; her delivery and demeanor made the best of a less-than-perfect situation. Ms. Jones's carrying power was blessedly unamplified and just enough. The storytelling, on the other hand, does more to disrupt than to link. When the spoken word and music work as counterpoint, there are nice moments, but they are few.
In ''Psyche,'' Franck finds the precise musical translation for languor; but languid, I am afraid, is not in Mr. Masur's vocabulary. If the pace was too fast, the proportions and pacing were first rate. If Mr. Masur made the sound more muscular than voluptuous, the tuning and balance were admirable. Anyone who doesn't know this music should go to one of the remaining performances, this morning and Tuesday evening.
Before intermission, the 14-year-old Helen Huang played the piano in Mozart's C-Major Concerto (K. 467). Ms. Huang wrestled with the difficult first movement and rattled nicely in the finale. I liked the famous Andante because of, and not in spite of, her limitations. In a manner that was straightforward and virtually interpretation free, a child played like a child, and that is as it should be.
Ms. Huang one day will be a valuable performer, but I think right now we are more interested in her precociousness than the music she produces. Hidden behind a screen and announced as the work of a 40-year-old, this performance would have inspired little interest from anybody.
MUSIC REVIEW
Mr. McClinton's singing isn't flashy. He has a forthright delivery: landing his phrases directly on the downbeat, ending them with the downward curl of the blues, climbing to gravelly high notes, sometimes jumping to a note or two of falsetto. The scratch in his voice can be a rough-and-ready come-on or an aching plea; it's worn but ready for more. Without drawing attention to his own technique, Mr. McClinton just makes the songs sound natural.
On Thursday, his set toured down-home America, from Chicago blues shuffles to rolling New Orleans rhythm-and-blues to greasy Memphis funk to rowdy Texas twang. Mr. McClinton's band is as polished as a 100-year-old brass rail; the rhythm section keeps the backbeat strolling along, the organ and piano can play with gospelly reverence or barrelhouse exuberance, and the two-man horn section tosses riffs back and forth with Mr. McClinton's own harmonica. The band included Gary Nicholson, a guitarist who has written country hits for Patty Loveless and others and who collaborated with Mr. McClinton on many of his new songs.
As usual, Mr. McClinton sang about love and lust. In new songs like the Rolling Stones-flavored ''Old Weakness (Coming on Strong)'' and the New Orleans-style ''Best of Me,'' a woman's presence makes his willpower crumble, while ''Lie No Better'' and ''You Were Never Mine'' bemoan a woman's duplicity.
True to honky-tonk tradition, Mr. McClinton allows himself a classic double standard; while he seeks new conquests, telling them they've ''Never Been Rocked Enough,'' he gets bitter and jealous if a woman cheats on him. But Mr. McClinton and his band are holdouts from an earlier day, and hearing them perform, it's easy to forget how quickly that era is vanishing.
POP REVIEW
But people were there to enjoy the music, too, and Mr. Chirino and his orchestra provided some fairly modern dance music. Mr. Chirino is a good listener, and in his hands Afro-Cuban music can incorporate everything from funk -- he, like modern Cuban bands, uses a drum kit -- and pop music to Puerto Rican plenas and merengue from the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Chirino has a thin, pure voice, and when he and the band were working on more traditional material, including his hits, he improvised against a chorus that included two of his daughters and Cheito Quinones, a gifted singer. With six horns, two keyboards and a full percussion section, the band had power. But it wasn't always rhythmically accurate, and at times the group's groove dissipated into confusion.
By the end of the long show Mr. Chirino had sung in Spanish and English (he performed an Afro-Cuban version of the Beatles' ''Eleanor Rigby'') and made a case for a pan-Caribbean style. He sang a tribute to Desi Arnaz and a bolero made famous by Benny More. One tune ran through a list of former Communist countries -- Russia, Hungary -- followed by the chorus ''libre,'' or free. The list ended with Cuba, and the audience loved it.
MUSIC REVIEW
Ms. Lang never rushes; she phrases in long, graceful arcs, free of the showy swoops and turns that most current singers can't resist. Her vocal models come from outside and before rock: the country of Patsy Cline and Roy Orbison, the pop of Peggy Lee and Karen Carpenter, the jazz of Jimmy Scott and Shirley Horn. Ms. Lang can growl and belt and break notes at crucial places. But far more often she chooses to make her lines hover, with just a touch of vibrato or a hint of graininess to suggest how much she's holding back.
Ms. Lang's band shares her restraint. On Thursday night it recaptured the smooth, genre-perfect escapism of prerock ballads, as it did in her tiptoeing version of Les Paul and Mary Ford's hit ''Smoke Rings,'' with its sliding vocal harmonies. But just as often, the band steers the music away from simple revivalism. As she sang David Wilcox's resigned and despairing ballad, ''My Old Addiction,'' she was accompanied by Teddy Borowiecki's cabaret-style piano, but Kevin Breit on guitar added eerie tones -- peeping at the edges of the chords -- that brought the arrangement into the present.
Between songs Ms. Lang was calm and droll, fielding the shouted endearments of her audience one by one. In some songs, like Steve Miller's ''Joker'' (one of the few songs even her voice can't improve) and her own ''Miss Chatelaine'' (which she changed, in one verse, to ''Mr. Chatelaine''), she was openly campy, dancing while bubbles filled the stage. But for most of the two-hour set, she made sure that her self-consciousness didn't undermine the songs; it simply added another layer of struggle between control and abandon. Love, like addiction, can conquer people even when they think they know better.
POP REVIEW
The program was strange but promising. Haydn's Symphony No. 26 in D minor, which had the first half of the concert to itself, was an interesting preface to the Shostakovich. It is, after all, a hybrid, a symphony that also had a life in the church as part of the accompaniment to a Passion setting.
Its most compelling moment comes in the Adagio, in which the winds play the Gregorian chant associated with the Lamentations of Jeremiah, while the strings weave an elegant decorative figure around it. Yet the work's finale, a cheery minuet, seems both at odds with the first two movements and entirely inconclusive: the ear expects a brisk finale.
Mr. Welser-Most reduced the orchestra's string body for the Haydn, yet textures that should have been sleek and trim seemed outsize and leaden. There were also some surprising imprecisions in the ensemble, something that did not bode well for the Shostakovich.
Ensemble and intonation problems did crop up in the Eighth Symphony as well, but the most immediate problem was Mr. Welser-Most's glacial tempo in the work's opening pages. Perhaps his hope was that turning an Adagio into a crawl would intensify the tragedy; instead, it dissipated the nervous energy on which the first movement must build. As tepid as the opening was, though, the buildup that begins about two-thirds of the way into the movement proved quite powerful.
So did the Allegretto, which was as brash as one could want. And if there were moments in the Allegro non troppo when the wind playing could have been more pointed, the energetic string playing and the strident brass blasts provided ample drama.
But in the Largo, the performance began to unravel again. The movement's opening conveys a frozen moment of complete desolation, and for a few moments, Mr. Welser-Most and the orchestra's strings captured it flawlessly. But they could not sustain it. As in the opening movement, tension flagged; and from here through the end of the score, brass problems, particularly in the perilous horn parts, took a heavy toll.
MUSIC REVIEW
Mr. Kellogg begins with a happy inheritance: a handful of recent and honorable productions of the Puccini-Donizetti-Verdi literature devised to satisfy a company's need for a workable standard repertory. With the status quo more or less in hand, he has taken to flooding us with new and interesting things: recently Gluck's ''Iphigenie en Tauride,'' next week ''The Voyage of Marco Polo,'' by Tan Dun, and on Saturday Handel's serio-comic opera, here in a credible redesign and translation by Stephen Wadsworth.
While these productions are new to us and to the company, they are not new at all (the exception being the homegrown ''Macbeth'' that opened the season). ''Iphigenie'' comes by way of Mr. Kellogg's other opera company, Glimmerglass in Cooperstown, N.Y.; ''Marco Polo'' has had prior outings in Europe.
Similarly, although the Skylight Theater in Milwaukee and the Santa Fe Opera would resist the designation, the two companies have been the test kitchen for Mr. Wadsworth's ''Xerxes,'' providing a chance for bad ideas to be discarded and the good ones to be shipped on to us in New York.
There is a time change in the setting, from Herodotus to the England of George II. Thomas Lynch's fixed set (no scene-ending curtains, just blackouts) is a wall framed by the obligatory plane tree and a two-story house. The tree is nicely gnarled; the pale brick identifies old England as clearly as if it were a written label.
Given the rhythms and colors of two very different languages, Mr. Wadsworth has had to demolish the Italian original and create something new. His English is American but not obtrusively so; it is often clever; it is also prone, especially in the last two acts, to overly cute rhyming effects.
What separated Saturday's ''Xerxes'' from efforts like it in the recent past was not just the finish of the production but the world-class casting. The City Opera has always been a house for American singers, but that principle has too often turned it into a postgraduate workshop for the promising and ill-prepared.
Lorraine Hunt in the title role was stunning, David Daniels's Arsamene scarcely less so. Amy Burton was a first-rate Romilda, Jan Opalach a sturdy Ariodate. As Atalanta, Susannah Waters had her hectic moments but did well. James Bobick's comic acting as Elviro never quite made up for a straying sense of pitch.
The City Opera orchestra, sounding so disconsolate in past years, seemed enthusiastic and energetic. George Manahan conducted using sensible compromises between historical fact and contemporary practice. The strings were modern, but there were John Beeson's harpsichord and Richard Kolb's lute biting at the heels of every attack.
Old and new also inhabited the vocal styles: clear rhythms, quick tempos, but big, dramatic singing too. Of special note was the use of cadenzas not for technical display but as a vehicle for emotional outburst. Mr. Wadsworth leans on the comic aspect of ''Xerxes,'' but Ms. Hunt's splendid extroversions -- white hot but very much in control -- brought back the human unhappinesses Handel's opera projects as well. Mr. Daniels and Ms. Burton used similar opportunities.
The plot of ''Xerxes,'' a story of mismatched lovers, requires powers of explanation that are probably not worth the effort or the space.
The final reconciliations are not convincing, but hanging vividly and disquietingly over the proceedings is a ruler's total power over the lives of those around him.
Saturday's audience was large, knowledgeable and wildly enthusiastic. This was not the City Opera's mom-and-pop ''La Boheme'' crowd, but one more liberally sprinkled with younger, hipper listeners, the type found more often these days across the river at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. The signs are good.
XERXES
Opera in three acts by George Frideric Handel, libretto by Nicolo Minato and Silvio Stampiglia; conductor, George Manahan; director, Stephen Wadsworth; sets by Thomas Lynch; costumes by Martin Pakledinaz; lighting by Peter Kaczorowski. Performed by the New York City Opera at the New York State Theater.
WITH: Lorraine Hunt (Xerxes), David Daniels (Arsamene), James Bobick (Elviro), Amy Burton (Romilda), Susannah Waters (Atalanta), Jennifer Lane (Amastre) and Jan Opalach (Ariodate).
OPERA REVIEW  Correction:  November 4, 1997, Tuesday
A picture caption yesterday with a review of the New York City Opera's production of Handel's ''Xerxes'' misidentified the performer with David Daniels. She was Amy Burton, not Lorraine Hunt.
Of course, there is a place for humor in contemporary music: that case was made decisively by Haleh Abghari's virtuoso and winning performance of some of Georges Aperghis's ''Recitations'' for solo voice. Each little piece was built from a small repertory of nonsense vocables -- grunts, squeaks and mutterings -- and each became, in Ms. Abghari's delivery, a sharp and funny image of stereotypical behavior.
There was humor, too, and again virtuosity, in a brilliant performance by Speculum Musicae of a classic Charles Wuorinen piece, his ''Arabia Felix.'' Music here becomes a rush of color and madness, ending on a high point of peril with a fast unison melody. One hopes for more such pieces as Sonic Boom reverberates, and more such performances.
MUSIC REVIEW
During the 1990's, he has stepped forward as a performer and begun to make appearances in the United States. His songs are cagey, cranky rants; they're full of advice, messianic pronouncements, come-ons and doggerel, with lucid nuggets surrounded by malarkey. As he shifted from speaking to rhythmic chanting to singing in a feisty, grizzled voice, Mr. Perry was both preacher and singer; he didn't always stop declaiming when the music ended.
But rhythm was never far from his mind. At Wetlands, he was backed by one of reggae's sturdiest bands, the Robotiks, while one of his many admirers, the Mad Professor, ran the mixing board. Using echoes, thunderclaps of reverberation and selective instant replays, the Mad Professor turned the steady vamps into rhythmic halls of mirrors, multiplying the drums and cymbals and sending keyboard chords rippling across the beat.
Mr. Perry was dressed like an Afro-Caribbean deity figure. He wore a mirrored headband, earrings, rings on all 10 fingers, golden bracelets and a T-shirt with a space alien on it, captioned ''Take me to your dealer.'' In the crook of one arm he held a plastic gorilla, suggesting the title of one of his finest albums, ''Super Ape'' (Island Records). He had a black mask painted on his face, perhaps because he was performing on Halloween. Along with his microphone, he held a bicycle horn, honking it every so often.
Some of the songs came from ''Black Ark Experryments'' (Ariwa/ Ras), an album Mr. Perry made with the Mad Professor in 1995; others were glosses on 1960's American soul hits like ''I'll Take You There'' and ''Papa Was a Rolling Stone.'' A few had succinct choruses; more just rolled along on the Robotiks' inexorable grooves, which kept the packed house dancing until nearly 3 A.M. It was less a typical concert than a visitation from a character whose quirks are inseparable from his inspirations.
POP REVIEW
Yo La Tengo's attraction for returning concertgoers is its intense concentration, not on the audience but on itself. Unlike many rock artists, Mr. Kaplan; the drummer and slyly demure co-vocalist, Georgia Hubley, and the bassist, James McNew, eschew rote showmanship in favor of extemporaneous investigations of their ever-growing songbook. Performances may be exceedingly quiet, vigorous or expansive. On Sunday, the group journeyed through all these moods, sometimes within one song.
Mr. Kaplan and Ms. Hubley, his wife, have an instinct for each other's playing, and after working with myriad collaborators, finally found an empathetic third in Mr. McNew. Whether whipping up a feedback-stoked frenzy or relaxing into a pensive ballad, they never stumbled. Yo La Tengo played with arrangements. On the normally sedate ''Autumn Sweater,'' Mr. Kaplan played raucous keyboards while Mr. McNew and Rachel McNally, of Sleepyhead, joined Ms. Hubley on percussion. On ''Attack on Love,'' Stephin Merritt of Magnetic Fields (which opened the show with its own enchanting set) uttered a beatnik-flavored rap while Ms. Hubley led the musicians in a noisy excursion that touched on free jazz.
Later, Yo La Tengo stretched the already expansive ''Blue Line Swinger'' into a 12-minute tone poem, its tempo accelerating from a slow swoon to a crashing peak. Such moments are the stuff of which its memorable shows are made: a bit of the unexpected, expertly rendered by sage practitioners of the art.
ROCK REVIEW
Lonnie Pitchford assembled a one-stringed diddly-bow on stage from a 2-by-4, two nails, a piece of baling wire and a tobacco can; using a slide, he played driving, wailing blues phrases on it. He also played another kind of diddly-bow, already assembled, then moved on to acoustic guitar. He sang familiar blues, like ''C. C. Rider,'' in a calmly desolate voice, lingering over his woes while plucking quiet, intricate guitar parts.
Jerry Ricks was born in Philadelphia but has soaked up Mississippi blues since the 1950's. During the 1970's and 80's, Mr. Ricks spent most of his time abroad; in the 1990's, he said, he became ''the only person in the history of the United States to emigrate to the Delta.''
Mr. Ricks is a master of classic rural blues styles: his thumb plucking a steady rhythm while his fingers pick syncopated filigrees above, sometimes juggling melodies in two or three registers at once. In a husky voice with the confiding tone of Mississippi John Hurt, he sang matter-of-factly about feeling homesick and haunted by the blues. Mr. Pitchford returned for duets with Mr. Ricks, but the two bluesmen, both used to playing solo, didn't quite mesh.
Willie Foster, a 76-year-old harmonica player and singer, led a Chicago-style electric blues band from a wheelchair; he lost a leg two and a half years ago. His songs are determinedly upbeat, praising the power of love, with music that directly echoes Mr. Foster's heroes, among them Jimmy Reed, Muddy Waters and Albert King. While his voice was serviceable, his harmonica was eloquent, delivering succinct, streamlined phrases with youthful assurance.
The festival, presented by the World Music Institute and Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, continues with a blues and dance performance on Thursday and the Muddy Waters Tribute Band on Friday and Saturday.
POP REVIEW
And yet musicians keep coming along who have something new to tell us about these touchstone repertory works, or at least a fresh way to tell us something we already knew. So, I should not have been so surprised to find myself engrossed by two new recordings featuring two fine baritones.
'Winterreise'
Last season at Carnegie Hall the American baritone Thomas Hampson performed ''Winterreise'' with the conductor Wolfgang Sawallisch, music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra, at the piano. It was a somewhat frustrating performance. Mr. Hampson sang with intelligence and, for the most part, resplendent sound. But he could not refrain, it seemed, from pushing his voice to make a big impact in the grand hall.
These artists have recorded the work on a new EMI Classics release (7243 5 56445) and the result is exemplary. Mr. Hampson's singing, as captured here, has ample richness and operatic resonance. But more nuance and arresting detail come through as we follow the winter journey of the jilted, delusional protagonist into madness. In plaintive, high-lying passages, Mr. Hampson's voice has an affecting tenorial beauty. And few native-German singers project the text with more clarity than does this Indiana-born baritone.
Mr. Sawallisch's pianism is utterly distinguished. From the first song, ''Gute Nacht,'' he shapes the music with expressive freedom. Yet rhythmic details are executed scrupulously. He is not the most fleet-fingered pianist; the rustling-tree effects in ''Der Lindenbaum'' are taken at a measured tempo. Yet there is dramatic tension in his approach, and every note speaks. These artists clearly inspire each other. The recording is splendid.
'Die Schone Mullerin'
A new recording of ''Die Schone Mullerin'' on Sony Classical (SK 63075) offers a rewarding performance by the Danish baritone Bo Skovhus, who could not be more different from Mr. Hampson: Mr. Skovhus's singing is cooler and less varied in its shadings. Yet his voice has virile energy and husky character, even in soft, high-set phrases. In the restless ''Ungeduld,'' he suggests breathless impatience without resorting, as so many baritones do, to bluster. He brings grace and lyricism to the gentle phrases of ''Morgengruss,'' yet never turns cloying.
The pianist, Helmut Deutsch, plays with crispness, supple rhythm and structural clarity. The song ''Wohin?'' is taken at an ambling tempo, whereas most other interpreters favor a quicker pace so that the rippling figures of the accompaniment better suggest the brook from which a wandering young man suffering from unrequited love seldom strays. But the deliberate tempo lends the song more depth: this brook's flowing seems inexorable and ominous. Some Schubert song devotees will prefer interpreters who more viscerally act out the drama. But this is an elegant and thoughtful performance.
'The Songs of Frank Bridge'
Schubert wrote over 600 songs and all of them have been recorded at least once. The British composer Frank Bridge (1879-1941) composed just 45 songs and, until now, only a scattered few have made it to recording. So the new two-disk set of Bridge's complete songs on Hyperion (CDA67181/2) is a welcome contribution. Bridge, a composer, conductor and violist, was one of the most complete and respected musicians of his days. Sadly, he is probably best known today for having taught composition to Benjamin Britten.
One of the many interesting aspects of this recording, which presents the songs chronologically, is its overview of the composer's development: we hear Bridge evolve from a promising conservatory student to a distinctive, mature professional. Bridge favored song texts of literary distinction and, with some notable exceptions, avoided setting poems that had already been set by others. In his first songs, composed when he was 22, you hear liquid, Faure-like textures, expansive Brahmsian melodies and wayward late-Romantic harmonies.
Some of the early efforts merely aim to appease an Edwardian public's taste for drawing-room ballads. But by 1904, in songs like ''A Dead Violet'' to a poem by Percy Shelley, Bridge, just 25, showed boldness and skill: harmonies shift without warning, and pliant, often melodious, vocal lines give lift to the words, which are set with naturalness. Bridge's songs from after World War I, when he came under the influence of Alban Berg, are striking for their unhinged chromatic harmonies and kinetic, Expressionistic piano writing. The soprano Janice Watson, the mezzo-soprano Louise Winter, the tenor Jamie MacDougall and the baritone Gerald Finley divide the songs among themselves effectively, and sing them with the loving attention they deserve. The sensitive, nimble pianist is Roger Vignoles.
Ms. Marcovicci's new show, a celebration of songs performed by Mabel Mercer, the grande dame of cabaret who died in 1984, is easily her most mature program, and it suggests that the singer is well on her way to achieving the same kind of status. Between performing more than two dozen songs accompanied by Glenn Mehrbach on piano, she relates the life story of Mercer, who at the height of her legend loomed as a sage, dispensing nuggets of romantic wisdom in a style of speech-song she called parlando.
Although Ms. Marcovicci, who was once a folk-pop singer, has an entirely different kind of voice, she has refined her own brand of parlando, phrasing songs in impulsive gusts of feeling and creating dramatic tension by contrasting two vocal registers, a hard grainy alto and a tremulous, wilting soprano. What knits everything together is the intensity with which she dramatizes each song, bringing to each a luminous smiling-through-tears sincerity and humor.
Among the composers represented in her show, Cy Coleman, a Mercer favorite, gets the most attention, followed by Cole Porter and Bart Howard. But on Wednesday, the numbers from which she wrung the deepest pathos were more recent ballads. A halting, almost frightened ''The Way We Were'' found Ms. Marcovicci wandering through the past transfixed by the lyrics' ''scattered pictures.'' ''Both Sides Now'' was also a descent, from confidence into the mystified ambivalence of the words ''I really don't know life at all.''
CABARET REVIEW
Not so long ago, the Scherzo from Henry Charles Litolff's Fourth Piano Concerto was often programmed as a self-standing work by fleet-fingered soloists. Now, even those few minutes of Litolff's music resonate only dimly in the memory. Yet the engagingly tuneful and technically accomplished scores here make a strong case for the composer.
His Second Concerto possesses several virtues: not least, a graceful principal theme, which is given a haunting quality in Peter Donohoe's crystalline playing. The Scherzo -- a gay caprice, really -- is attractive, too, as is the scampering Rondo finale. Especially in the runs, Mr. Donohoe plays this music with impressive fluidity.
The Fourth Concerto is in many ways a more substantial work, yet it, too, delights. Vigorous allegros frame the piece, and the probing Adagio contrasts nicely with the bracingly athletic Scherzo.
Mr. Donohoe's muscular pianism in both concertos proves as winning as the music itself. Nimble but never glib, the pianist treats Litolff's work with respect and is all the more persuasive for that commitment.
Andrew Litton's conducting evinces similar dedication, and the Bournemouth players demonstrate their own enthusiasm at every turn.
DAVID MERMELSTEIN
Placing the Welsh bass-baritone Bryn Terfel in the title role of Mendelssohn's great oratotio, as this set does and as the New York Philharmonic is doing this week, is not an obvious choice, but it is an inspired one. Mr. Terfel embraces the Old Testament finger-wagging with gusto. Although he may not displace such nearly forgotten Elijahs as the Australian Harold Williams, he is a more than credible prophet, with a voice that suitably shakes the rafters.
The sweet-sounding soprano Renee Fleming brings operatic intensity to this work, especially in the duet ''What have I to do with thee?,'' where she and Mr. Terfel spar vigorously. The English tenor John Mark Ainsley, also at the Philharmonic this week, provides characteristically well-mannered singing, which ideally suits the words of the gentle Obadiah.
But the real star here may be the Edinburgh Festival Chorus, which consistently raises a mighty noise. If Elijah's words don't put the fear of God in a listener, the raw power of several of the choruses should do the trick.
Led by Paul Daniel, the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment supports the whole enterprise, sounding vital and tightly sprung.
Any future recording of ''Elijah'' will face stiff competition from this compelling effort.
DAVID MERMELSTEIN
Wally Brill--
''THE COVENANT'' -- (Six Degrees/Island). The only track on this disk that relates to the season is ''Kiddush Le-Shabbat,'' which made its debut on last year's Hanukkah collection, ''A Festival of Light.'' But Wally Brill's journey into Judaica is wholly involving. It began with a stack of 78-rpm recordings by American cantors that the seasoned music producer uncovered a while ago, and those voices waft through his soundscapes like guardian angels. A wealth of other elements swirl and form around the cantors' trails. Those who believe winter is a time for renewal through contemplation will find this recording a useful tool.
ANN POWERS
That anonymity is also a matter of compositional tradition. In this program, Mr. Phillips and his singers were inviting us to compare and contrast the music of Clemens non Papa, who lived in the first half of the 16th century, with that of his elders (Obrecht and Willaert) and a successor, Lassus.
But there are strong aspects of style, particularly in the interweaving of melodic echoes, that cut across the generations. If Clemens's music stood out, it was for his perpetuation of harmonic stasis, especially in his ''Pastores quidnam vidistis'' Mass, where the voices tend to move within narrow ranges and the soprano line wants to keep to a monotone.
Against this, both Obrecht and Lassus, though they lived a century apart, came across as masters of vividness. The concert ended with a thumping Magnificat by Lassus in eight parts, but even more exciting and beautiful was the six-part Salve Regina of Obrecht. Hearing this performed was like looking at a Flemish painting and seeing it happen.
By PAUL GRIFFITHS
MUSIC REVIEW
Programming it is a problem. Here the problem is solved by ripping the sonata apart and stuffing the rest of the program, the Three Romances (Op. 94) for oboe, and six vocal duets, similarly intermixed, between the middle movements.
It works, even without the pseudo musicological excuse the performers (or Patrick Ruker, their annotator) offer, citing the irrelevant 18th-century custom of framing public concerts with the outer movements of a symphony, and confusing salons (aristocratic gatherings) with ''Hausmusik'' (home music-making). The ploy needs no apology. It gives the attention a fresh start, and the separation of the middle movements makes the reminiscences of the scherzo more distant, and more poignant, than ever.
The scholarly bad conscience and the legend ''performed on period instruments'' might seem to imply an early-music approach, chiefly concerned with jots and tittles. There are a few studied moments, perhaps. Nor is there much the singers -- Charlotte Hellekant, a mezzo-soprano, and Paul Groves, a tenor -- can do about the cutesy ''Biedermeier'' sentimentality of a couple of the vocal numbers.
But for the most part these are fresh and spontaneous-sounding performances (coached, one assumes, by the ensemble's artistic director, Albert Fuller -- or why is his name there? -- and coached expertly). Pedja Muzijevic's piano playing, a constant presence, has throughout the lovely, subtle Schwung without which Schumann should be left unsung.
One 14-minute stretch is pure magic: the Third Romance, in which Marc Schachman, the oboist, catches the elusive Schumann ''Legendenton'' (long long ago and far far away) to perfection; the ''Wiegenlied,'' a lullaby crooned at the bedside of a sick child, full of softly stinging dissonances to convey the parents' worry, and the slow movement of the sonata, where Mark Steinberg's vibratoless violin tone is especially haunting.
Play these three late at night, sitting alone (or in very special company), and you'll never forget this disk.
RECORDINGS VIEW
''THE COMPLETE BILL EVANS ON VERVE''  (18 CD's). One would expect a rusted-steel, hinged CD box, a package that looks menacing, to be saying something about the music within. But we're talking about Bill Evans, the inward-looking pianist whose music exuded melancholy. This mammoth set hits a new high in consumer exhaustion. It contains every Verve session through the 60's that included Evans. Highlights and oddities include his brilliant ''Trio 64'' album with Gary Peacock and Paul Motian, with an hour's worth of relevant outtakes; the film-soundtrackish album he recorded as part of the vibraphonist Gary McFarland's group; two albums of solo piano with his own layered overdubbings; and the schlocky ''From Left to Right'' album, with electric pianos and an orchestra.
BEN RATLIFF
STAN GETZ: ''THE COMPLETE ROOST RECORDINGS''  (Blue Note, three CD's). The often sublime music here established Stan Getz's reputation as an utterly distinct improviser. Recorded between 1950 and 1954, with sidemen like the pianists Al Haig, Horace Silver and Duke Jordan and the guitarists Johnny Smith and Jimmy Raney, the music is fledgling Getz. The flow is there, but there's conflict between his conception and the toughness of the bop surroundings. The sessions include live dates, Getz with Count Basie's orchestra and a session originally recorded under Johnny Smith's name.
PETER WATROUS
The Beethoven and Chopin, in fact, received the least compelling performances. Beethoven's ''Eroica'' Variations, which opened the program, were given a muscular reading that served the aggressive and titanic variations better than the more delicate and introspective ones. And two Chopin Mazurkas (Op. 30, No. 4, and Op. 59, No. 3), sandwiched between spiky works by Mr. Edwards and Mr. Babbitt, seemed merely in the way.
What Mr. Feinberg did to bridge the gap between the 19th- and 20th-century works -- and this was the most striking aspect of his performance -- was show that within each of the new works, however angular and harmonically ambiguous, narrative lines could be found and traced. This was particularly the case in the Sessions Sonata No. 3: each movement had a clear dramatic line, and just as the ''Eroica'' Variations moves gradually from the simple to the thorny, the movements of the Sessions expand gracefully in both texture and color. The slow third movement, composed just after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963, proved especially touching in final pages, when its dark, tranquil lines expanded into a kind of tense, questioning protest.
Mr. Feinberg's high-energy reading of Mr. Wuorinen's Sonata No. 3 also focused on dramatic continuity, particularly in the first movement, in which interlocking melodic strands seemed in this performance to carry vague echoes of Baroque keyboard music.
In Mr. Edwards's ''Czeched Swing,'' Mr. Feinberg maintained a sense of structural clarity and brought out the almost visual qualities of the music's juxtapositions of pointillism and gently arching melodic curves. And he found an interesting combination of delicacy and vitality in Mr. Babbitt's ''Partition,'' ''Minute Waltz'' and ''Playing for Time,'' three tactile works that share a concern with textural spareness and extremes of range. Mr. Feinberg showed that they also embody a subtle humor.
MUSIC REVIEW
The two other shows of the series set up Mr. Roach against the percussionist Tito Puente, the choreographer Bill T. Jones and the video artist Kit Fitzgerald.
Since the 1960's, Mr. Roach has been seeking the great American interdisciplinary document. He has mixed up jazz, blues, gospel, salsa, classical music, political protest, video and dance, among other things.  The legendary drummer has been a champion question-raiser, and often a strident one, and Tuesday's performance continued that practice.  The program notes explained: ''What happens when two art forms collide? Do they synthesize? Do they separate?'' (A third art form brought into the mix was lighting, courtesy of a lighting designer named Blu. Neon tubes spelled out ''MAX'' in 10-foot letters behind the band, and in the cracks of that word, in smaller red letters, a mysterious ''ABC.'')
To get away from the rhetorical questions for a minute, however, gospel and jazz have synthesized quite well in music by Charles Mingus and Duke Ellington. Mr. Roach has been down this way before as well. One of the pieces in the program was a shortened version of the Rev. Dr.  Martin Luther King Jr.'s ''I have a dream'' speech, read by the Rev. Elliot Hoskins in front of a soloing Mr. Roach; the drummer performed a longer, more satisfying version of this at the Y several years back. And Mr. Roach has long used vocal choirs and other hints of the church in recordings. It's one of his own well-practiced idioms.
The singers, numbering about 40, out-spirited the band, providing the concert's best moments in songs with vocal parts they had arranged themselves. Over simple modal forms played by the band, they sang in a robust, rhythmically straight style, with a minimum of emotional overlay; they didn't really attempt to synthesize with Mr. Roach's rhythms, which are often complex and fractured. (When he soloed, they stopped, and vice versa.) But Eunice Newkirk's profoundly belted solo in Mr. Roach's ''Garden of Prayer'' and the group's choruses in ''Lift Every Voice and Sing'' were particularly vibrant; the voices exuded commitment and energy.
Those were the qualities needed in the instrumental sections. Its potential drastically diminished by Lafayette Harris's use of an electric keyboard instead of a proper piano, the sextet played diffidently; Odean Pope, playing tenor saxophone,  broke through the crust with a lively solo version of Benny Golson's ''I Remember Clifford'' that engaged the crowd.
The stage setting had Mr. Roach elevated on a riser, separated from his band. Though it didn't promote communication within the sextet, it certainly made his short solo section more visually dramatic, and some of his finest moments were in lone performances behind the drum kit.
Mr. Roach deconstructed rhythms, showing the seams in them; he separated ideas out into small, spiky particles with definite pitches, playing them with a soft slap. Gradually he brought them together, without overstatement, and ended the solo once he established a continuous rhythm.
MUSIC REVIEW
Style and proficiency are interlocked in these performances. The less skilled the chorus, the heavier the texture and the slower the tempos: laws of gravity are at work. Other ''Messiah'' enterprises, like the one by Musica Sacra at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night, aim a little higher.
Richard Westenburg's 36-member group is lighter of foot, partly because of its director's wishes, partly because its more professional standards allow it to be. Musica Sacra, in business for almost 30 years, also has its audience. Carnegie Hall was filled with quiet, attentive ears.
Yet the dead-on virtuoso performance that Mr. Westenburg's operatives would seem to promise escaped them. The four solo singers, especially the men, were very  good. The chorus, after some introductory vagaries of ensemble in Part I, became quite articulate in Parts II and III.
The 24 string players, using modern instruments, offered luxurious size and a lot of individual competence. Raymond Mase's tendency to croon the high trumpet parts is a little disconcerting, but he was utterly reliable in exposed situations.
Ad hoc, on the other hand, seemed the order of the evening. The opening Sinfonia was not a good omen. The number of ideas on  how the dotted rhythms were to be  done seemed to equal the number of players. The junctures between phrases became blurs, and in Handel this will not do.
Nothing throughout the evening was especially out of tune or blatantly out of place, yet one heard musicians reading notes on music stands. No one idea of how a phrase  was to be articulated or a rhythm executed was in place. Hired orchestras like this are expensive propositions. It made one wonder whether fewer players and more rehearsal time might have been the wiser strategy.
One looked for isolated pleasures amid the general air of compromise and found them. Mr. Westenburg's ''Messiah'' is light and fast; the lumbering and the tanklike are  avoided, and indeed, choruses like ''He Trusted in God'' danced splendidly.
Frederick Urrey was especially  attractive in the tenor solos, singing with a solid, steady delivery and an absolute confidence in the most florid of music. David Evitts was equally reliable, though signs of weariness in ''The Trumpet Shall Sound'' near the end made one relieved that his work for the evening was over.
Lynette Tapia's small but icily clear soprano pretty much coincided with Handel's wishes. Jane Gilbert negotiated the mezzo-soprano parts adequately but uneasily; the flexibility that the style requires somewhat eluded her.
This was the second of two ''Messiah'' performances by Musica Sacra in December, and it left a familiar masterpiece in a kind of limbo: flying high above the usual Christmas ''Messiah'' but frustratingly short of the ''Messiah'' it might have been.
MUSIC REVIEW
But when Mr. Schickele applies himself, he can be a clever musical parodist, as the best of the works he presented with his freelance orchestra, called the New York Pickup Ensemble, amply demonstrated. Best of all was his own ''Uptown Hoedown,'' a zany overture that dizzyingly mixes snippets of music from sources both exotic (Tchaikovsky's ''March Slav'') and silly (''Turkey in the Straw''). But, for all the fun, Mr. Schickele manages to show us things, like how the tune of ''Camptown Races'' and the theme by Haydn that Brahms used in his Haydn Variations are surprisingly similar.
But this time out, lame jokes outweighed musical parody, and some of the parody was lame as well. Countertenors are an easy a target for humor. But Mr. Schickele had three good sports in Johnny Maldonado, Drew Minter and David Sabella. The main item on the second half was ''The Hoarse Trojan,'' a dramatic scena about Annoyus, a great Trojan military leader who has lost his voice, and his two aides, a brilliant lawyer named Smartacus and a fat but fierce lawyer named Diameter. Whole arias on texts like ''Our Hero's Hunky-Dory'' were pretty dumb.
But once again, when Mr. Schickele channeled his humor into purely musical parody, he was quite inventive. ''When I Am Laid in Earth to Rest,'' a takeoff on the famous aria from Purcell's ''Dido and Aeneas,'' was mostly turned into a joke about the bawdy implications of the first four words. But the best humor came from the opening musical motive, in which Mr. Schickele mimics the repeated descending chromatic bass line over which Purcell constructs this aria with a descending chromatic bass line that just keeps descending, half-step by half-step.
Given that the humor in ''The Hoarse Trojan'' was text-driven, it was unfortunate that the three countertenor soloists were a little weak of voice. Making out the words was a struggle. But they otherwise threw themselves into the spirit of the evening.
And even some of Mr. Schickele's broadest jokes sometimes hit their mark, especially with New Yorkers. In the climactic moment of the stirring aria ''Sound the Alarm,'' the percussionist set off a smoke alarm with a cigarette that later triggered the ghastly, all-too-familiar sound of a wailing car alarm.
MUSIC REVIEW
The set got the cerebral out of the way first. ''Ludwig'' enfolded the melancholy, contrapuntal theme from the Allegretto movement of Beethoven's Seventh Symphony inside a hard, swinging tune, and the pianist made his phrases drawl and subside, like spoken sentences at the end of a breath line. It was a witty and epigrammatic piece, and it seemed to leave quietly through the same window by which it entered.
Mr. Goldings's piano gigs have become somewhat rare. He spends most of his professional life as an organist, and that instrument has taught him concision and awareness of the groove. He doesn't stretch out his improvisational ideas forever, but rather makes them stronger by breaking them up.
The tenor saxophonist Joel Frahm matched him for clarity throughout the set, his tone dry, hefty and taut; it was leavened with declarative humor and a little old-fashioned blues showmanship.
They finished with ''Grinning Song,'' a tune written by Mr. Goldings that captured the essence of the old soul-jazz organ groups. The drummer Jeff Ballard and the bassist Dennis Irwin accented every beat, playing hard on a simple good-time tune and transforming it into a long-form stomp, and Mr. Goldings filled it with a long, unfolding solo that rose in percussive intensity with each chorus.
JAZZ REVIEW
This season, an unusually large number of tour videos -- almost all by white, male rock bands -- are being released. Unlike concert videos and documentaries, these videos offer glimpses into the parts of a star's life where few fans are allowed to go: backstage, on the tour bus and in the hotel room. The videos are not accurate portrayals of life on the road, of course, nor are they great cinema like D. A. Pennebraker's Bob Dylan film, ''Don't Look Back.'' Some of these are simply reflections of what a band wants you to think the members are doing when you're not around; others are the hectic result of what happens when a band decides to let a friend tour with it as a ''video documentarian.''
Pantera
It will be a surprise if Pantera ever gets to perform at an arena or make a hotel reservation again after ''Three Watch It Go'' (Elektra). Over the course of a video that's nearly as long as ''Titanic,'' the hard-rock band and its roadies smash automobiles with sledgehammers, ride bikes naked into swimming pools, use power drills on one another's chests, fire automatic BB guns into the walls of hotel rooms and consume enough whisky to keep an army of liver specialists in business. After a decade and a half of touring, the band has turned destruction into a precision science: after every item of food has been thrown in a hospitality suite, every hand dryer ripped out of the bathroom wall, every mirror broken backstage, someone will take a pool cue or a guitar neck or a chair and poke out the light bulbs, the light fixture or the illuminated exit sign as one final, artistic touch. If there is a message to this mayhem, it's that boys will be boys.
Hanson
After watching Pantera, the three brothers in Hanson seem like angels. Someone's call for God to bless the children was definitely answered for them. In ''Tulsa, Tokyo and the Middle of Nowhere'' (Polygram Video/Mercury), they clown around through America, Paris, Italy, London, Australia, Indonesia, Japan and more. They get to play video games, try bungee jumping, dive off cliffs, navigate crowds of squealing girls and flirt with Cindy Crawford: and all with hardly an adult in sight. Just as other rock musicians like to keep their girlfriends and wives a secret to avoid disappointing love-struck fans, the Hansons like to keep their parents (though not their cold sores) hidden. For those who still doubt the brothers' musical abilities, this video shows them harmonizing a cappella and working in the studio. The best thing about the video is that just when viewers may begin to worry that they will develop some kind of Michael Jackson complex with so much attention, one of the brothers says something smart about the finite nature of fame or the ridiculousness of fan hysteria to make it clear that they just may grow up all right.
Nine Inch Nails
Nine Inch Nails made its reputation with its live shows, and the two-video set ''Closure'' (Nothing/Interscope) shows why. Montages of keyboards being smashed, microphone stands sent hurtling through drums (and sometimes into the drummer) and lyrics of self-hate screamed at a slam-dancing audience fill the first video. Backstage, the band is portrayed as a cross between Hanson (innocently joking around) and Pantera (tearing apart dressing rooms and encouraging women to expose themselves). The second video is even more engaging, collecting unexpurgated versions of the band's videos (most of which were censored on MTV) and connecting them with a montage of disturbing images compiled by the former Throbbing Gristle member Peter Christopherson.
Bush
With the release of ''Alleys and Motorways'' (Trauma/Interscope), one of the least interesting popular rock bands of the moment just got even more boring. Where Pantera celebrates a good show by destroying everything and everyone in sight, the members of Bush stand around alone and compliment one another on how brave they were. Where Hanson can be genuinely funny, Bush's humor is forced and awkward. Recommended only for those who want a collection of Bush videos or who like seeing the band's singer shirtless.
Mr. King wasn't playing any new material, really, but running through his older hits, including ''Rock Me Baby, ''The Thrill is Gone'' and ''Everyday I Have the Blues.'' But he's such a product of an improvisatory way of thinking that the tunes, as they are for a jazz musician, were simply a set of guideposts for soloing.
Mr. King on one piece played an opening chorus of sharp, percussive notes. He likes to change emotional key for his second chorus, and for it, instead of heating up, he slowed down, using liquid, bent notes that melted into each other: caressed notes that were expressive and vocal, nudging meaning out of the movement of pitch. Then he began to riff. He hit hard high notes, and yanked his hand away from the strings, jerking the band into the action.
In his recent autobiography, Mr. King makes clear the range of listening he was exposed to as a child in the Mississippi Delta, from rural bluesmen to Duke Ellington, Count Basie and Charlie Parker. Much of it comes out in his music, with his lines echoing the guitarists Charlie Christian, Django Reinhardt or Lonnie Johnson.
And his approach -- Mr. King's absorption of Duke Ellington was more than just musical -- his sophistication, his onstage generosity, is a product of black entertainment culture of the first half of the century. That culture has shaped America profoundly, and Mr. King, in fine shape, is one of the few musicians still capable of giving it full expression. He will be performing through Sunday.
MUSIC REVIEW
And on ''Step Lively, Watch the Closing Doors,'' he pushed swinging music out of its routine. Each member of the band took turns setting the tempo of the piece, with the drummer Leon Parker speeding up on his ride cymbal and the bassist Ed Howard slowing things down. Each musician placed his ideas up front; the others followed for a bit. And the musicians stopped playing for Mr. Hays's solo. The pianist set up an ostinato; Mr. Howard added the root of the chord, Mr. Parker started driving away and a piece that had opened up to the savannahs of free improvisation became concise.
''Diaspora,'' one part of Mr. Wilson's ''Trans African Suite,'' was built on bass figures that sometimes  harmonized with the piano. For Mr. Wilson's solo the tempo flared up, with Mr. Parker snapping away at the metal rims of his drums with wooden sticks. Everything changed, both formally and improvisationally, and Mr. Wilson and the band went straight to the heart of the matter, which was to make new music.
The Jazz Standard is at 116 East 27th Street, Manhattan.  MUSIC REVIEW
But the rest of the program stretched the definition of the prescribed ''French and American chamber music.'' Rachmaninoff wrote his Cello Sonata in Russia in 1901, well before he began his American career. Stravinsky's ''Suite Italienne'' reuses music from his ballet ''Pulcinella'' (written for Paris, at least, in 1920), which reuses music by Pergolesi and others, and it sounds Italian, as advertised.
As for the Barber, meanwhile, ''the piece doesn't sound American at all, nor French, but rather German,'' Renaud Machart, the music critic of Le Monde and the artistic adviser for the series, wrote in his program notes. And the Boulez, a brief toccata written for use in a Milan piano competition and since incorporated as a mere cadenza into a chamber work, ''Sur Incises,'' partakes mostly of an international modernist idiom, though it might, at another stretch, be considered Gallic in its coloristic washes and its cool, slightly quirky structural logic, rooted in a peripatetic rhythmic tattoo.
So in the end it was just a pleasant evening of chamber music, with mostly fine work from the young performers. Mr. Ducros offered a spirited sprint through the Boulez, and Mr. Pernoo was eloquent in the Rachmaninoff, though he had not warmed up to, or not mastered, the tricks in the Stravinsky.
The next concert, by the Gallois Quintet in March, promises actual French and maybe even American sounds.
MUSIC REVIEW
After intermission came Hale Smith's ''Ritual and Incantations,'' a nicely made and evocative piece, dating from 1974 and somewhat suggestive of Lutoslawski's works of that period. Then there was Philip Glass's Concerto for Saxophone Quartet, which brought the Rascher  back to the platform. When Mr. Glass uses trivial ideas to support great lengths of time unaided, his music's vacancy is magnificent: a vast nothing becomes a something. But when, as here, he calls into play the apparatus and the tradition of classical four-movement symphonic form, what comes out is a lot of little nothings, which do not add up to very much at all.  MUSIC REVIEW
The other two quartets consisted of strings (the Pacifica Quartet) and saxophones (Resounding Winds). Ill luck hit the former in the finale of Prokofiev's Second Quartet: a string broke, then the intonation wavered. But there was excellent playing in movements from Mendelssohn's E Minor Quartet and the F Major Quartet from Beethoven's Opus 18, the adagio of the latter featuring eloquent melody from the viola and cello.
Where four saxophones are concerned, though, a taste may well be thought enough. The members of Resounding Winds showed themselves excellent and fun-loving musicians in their selections from the earliest known saxophone quartet (written in 1857 by Jean-Baptiste Singelee) and from newer pieces by Robert Spittal (pseudo-medieval), Russell Peck (blues with noises) and J. Eric Wilson (jazzed-up spirituals).
The soloist was Mia Chung, whose decent account of Beethoven's ''Appassionata'' Sonata might have been more effective if she had drawn back draperies that muffled her sound.
MUSIC REVIEW
In the first set on Tuesday, playing the cowbell and bongos, Mr. Roena made the music take off. He counted off a tune, let his three singers sing some, then joined on the first break with his bell. The music always darted forward, driven by the sound of metal being struck by wood; Mr. Roena's placement of notes, the way they fit into patterns, brought the audience and the musicians together in a form of personal rhythmic transcendence. Mr. Roena has that kind of power.
He and his band were playing new and older material, including ''Cui Cui,'' and ''Que Se Sepa,'' tunes from his 1973 album, ''Roberto Roena y Su Apollo Sound 5.'' It was classic salsa at its best, with several improvising singers taking turns improvising between choruses. By the end of the second set, Mr. Roena had invited Tata Guines, the Cuban percussionist, onstage, along with New York's own master of the timbales, Ralph Irrizary. The singers let audience members take turns improvising lines; one man's, about Mr. Roena, had him on the floor laughing, and then the party was over.
MUSIC REVIEW
On several tunes, Mr. Collins played his wooden flute, bending notes; he also played an Irish jig against just the drums. On one piece he played both the soprano and tenor saxophones at the same time, calling up the ghost of Rahsaan Roland Kirk.
Some musicians simply sound good, and Mr. Collins is one of them. He has flow, his ideas rolling out of the horn with a narrative sense that keeps a listener interested. He's audacious rhythmically, with rhythmic repetitions that make his solos bristle with ideas. And he has a sense of humor.
Mr. Collins started the set with a joke: ''What's the difference between a large pizza and a jazz musician?'' The answer: ''A large pizza can feed a family of four.''
PETER WATROUS
JAZZ REVIEW
The program began with the opening movement of William Kraft's Concerto for Timpani and Orchestra, a showcase for Michael Herbert, the principal timpanist of Mr. Thomas's other orchestra, the San Francisco Symphony. The timpani might seem limited as a solo instrument, but by giving the soloist five tuned kettledrums, which are sometimes struck with sticks and sometimes caressed and thumped with hands gloved in leather and felt, Mr. Kraft expanded the instrument's palette considerably. Mr. Herbert played the solo line with energy and fluidity.
Keisuke Wakao, the assistant principal oboist of the Boston Symphony, gave a beautifully focused and appealingly light-textured account of the opening Allegro of Mozart's Oboe Concerto (K. 314), and Catherine Ransom, the second flutist of the Los Angeles Philharmonic, gave an aptly sweet-toned account of Chaminade's sugary Concertino (Op. 107).
The two most overtly virtuosic solo performances were in some ways the least satisfying, perhaps because both were transcriptions that didn't quite work. Paul Merkelo, the principal trumpeter of the Montreal Symphony, offered Franz Waxman's ''Carmen'' Fantasy, originally a violin showpiece from the film score for ''Humoresque.'' The violin can achieve a flightiness that is difficult to match on the trumpet, and although Mr. Merkelo largely succeeded on a technical level, there was little finesse in his reading.
Owen Lee, the principal bassist of the Cincinnati Symphony, played two movements of a Bach Concerto (BWV 1056), originally for keyboard. Bach transcriptions often work beautifully, but even Mr. Lee's deftness could not keep the solo line of the gorgeously airy slow movement from sounding oddly lumbering.
In each of these pieces Mr. Thomas drew a vital, unified and fully supportive sound from the orchestra, which had its moments in the spotlight in a quirky but arresting account of Schubert's ''Unfinished'' Symphony and a lively reading of Copland's ''Salon Mexico.''  MUSIC REVIEW
Cheri Knight
Ms. Knight isn't from the South; she's from western Massachusetts, where she tends a flower farm for a living. But her second solo album, ''The Northeast Kingdom'' (E-Squared), gives some clues about where country music could go.
Listening with one ear, you could accept much of the record as modern, radio-ready country; Emmylou Harris sings harmony on several cuts, and the occasional fiddles and steel guitar chime in. Ms. Knight's open, hollering voice also connotes the country tradition. But with its roughed-up guitars compressed behind bass and drums, it has a double identity as sophisticated pop. (The album is produced by Steve Earle, who has a lot of ideas about where country music might go.)
Without ever seeming like a country-music snob whose tastes only extend to 1954 -- the ever-growing genre of ''alternative country'' is full of them -- Ms. Knight's lyrics have an old-fashioned preoccupation with envy, disasters and territorial pride. ''If Wishes Were Horses,'' for example, is the sort of unglamorous drama that doesn't crop up on many mainstream Nashville records anymore: a patient and un-jokey admission of jealousy of a small-town neighbor. ''If I stuck needles and pins into a likeness of you,'' she sings to her rival in her dry, plain-truth voice, ''would I ever make you go away?''
Robert Wyatt
The social-misfit songwriter has become a pretty common figure in new music. Outsider artists like Vic Chestnutt, F. M. Cornog of East River Pipe and Daniel Johnston sing about the look of the world from the isolated viewpoint of the deranged, disadvantaged or depressed. Robert Wyatt is the daddy of them all, a rock drummer (for the English group Soft Machine) who fell from a window in 1973, became paralyzed from the waist down, and began a solo career with the album ''Rock Bottom.'' His albums, few and far between, are home-brewed stews composed with his wife, Alfreda Benge; they're full of cleverly worded, self-mocking humor and leftist political screeds, skittery rhythms played on a single drum or cymbal, simple cycles of keyboard chords. There is no bass drum on his records, but the absence of that throb is made up for by multiple layers of his own beautiful voice, a high, husky ululation with the accents of regular speech.
On ''Shleep'' (Thirsty Ear) -- the title inspired by recent bouts of insomnia -- he takes some indulgences in lumpy poetry. But with its curious choices for guest musicians, including the trombonist Annie Whitehead and the saxophonist Evan Parker, it flirts successfully with jazz; and a powerful song of philosophy, politics and heartsickness by Mr. Wyatt, of which there are several here, can make most European pop seem like juvenilia.
Bill Frisell
Judging by its fantasyland cover, you might think it's a children's album. The name has associations with jazz, but it sure isn't a jazz album -- there's not much interplay. Nor is it blues or country, though there are elements of both; it takes its time, breathing more than a pop record.
An improvising guitarist whose bright, bulging amplified notes and preoccupation with American folk forms and lullabies never really fit within jazz, Bill Frisell has lately made some steps into the realm of the airily precious. But ''Gone, Just Like a Train'' (Nonesuch) is his simplest and best recording in years, in which he leads a trio including the bassist Viktor Krauss and the drummer Jim Keltner. Mr. Keltner is one of rock's best session-drummers -- he provided the profound whomp for John Lennon's Plastic Ono Band among thousands of others -- and here he ties the guitarist to the ground. He deals only in essences, cutting out all that's more than a guiding taste of the rhythm, with the result that a handful of Mr. Frisell's older songs are explored more meaningfully than ever before.
Because the ensemble's primary instruments are drums, Swarm's music -- especially in the first half of the show -- can tend toward the monotonous, despite the neatly synchronized, highly energetic movements that send the players leaping, swaying and hopping while they perform, emitting an occasional yelp or chant and wheeling their drums around the stage.
Like their players, outfitted in orange coveralls or overalls and adorned with beards, head wraps or knitted caps, the drums are off the -- no pun intended -- regularly beaten path.
Among others, there are the Buddha belly, a 95-pound wearable drum suit looking like armor and beaten by the performer; tuned exhaust hoses, and a mandala drum with curved attachments. There is also an undulating marimba that looks from some angles like a section of dinosaur spine and ribs.
In the second half of the show, the music becomes more complex and interesting. On the stage at the outset are the 24-foot-long string, a stainless steel nine-string instrument resembling a laser gun, played with rosin-covered gloves; nearby is an instrument that looks like a lunar lander  with dish antennas, thin cables and struts. It can be bowed, plucked and thumped in conjunction with the long string.
In this piece the performers are costumed like space travelers, and their music possesses an otherworldly quality.
The innovative, inventive intellects and inexhaustible bodies behind Swarm are Scott Bishop, Dave Hatfield, Robin Reid and the ensemble's co-founders, Gregory Kozak and Bill Wallace.
SWARM
The Symphonic Work Assembly of Rhythm and Movement, a Canadian-based percussion band. Co-founders, Gregory Kozak and Bill Wallace; director of art, Mr. Wallace; director of music and composer, Mr. Kozak; instrument designer, Mr. Wallace. Presented by the New 42d Street. At the New Victory Theater, 209 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
WITH: Scott Bishop, Dave Hatfield, Gregory Kozak, Robin Reid and Bill Wallace.
THEATER REVIEW
''Samson's'' problems are many. First, how do you stretch a familiar biblical story over a three-hour period? The several events have a rewarding sex-and-violence quotient, but in between, stage life becomes almost stationary. It is often suggested that ''Samson et Dalila'' makes a better oratorio than an opera, a forum for opinion and sentiment in which no stage action is better than trumped-up stage action. Here, Saint-Saens's ballet music and Graeme Murphy's rough-and-tumble choreography worked hard arguing to the contrary.
Music could help, but a lot of it is not very  interesting. Dalila's ''Mon coeur s'oeuvre a ta voix'' is one of several oases that interrupt the long stretches of arid melodrama. And melodrama is a sore subject in our less demonstrative era of human behavior. In Placido Domingo's anguished gesticulation, in Denyce Graves's more genteel arm waving, and in the hyperactive prancings of  various spear carriers, one found more than a touch of camp to Mr. Moshinsky's methodology.
Bad opera directors turn to ridicule when they cannot solve the problems of period style in modern terms. This one is more subtle. Mr. Moshinsky seems to have concluded that ''Samson et Dalila'' possesses no depths to penetrate and so decides to admire its surfaces. Thus, his swing-and-sway mass movements become not necessarily lapses in taste but instead quizzical, almost scholarly studies of tastelessness itself. Moments of true dignity in this opera are, after all, not that many.
An even more important decision seems to have been this: that if staging and music will not succeed, color  might. Mr. Hudson offers a cast list of his own. The Israelites are played by grays and blacks. Righteousness  is drab; color is sin. Hero among the Philistines is bright orange, with a supporting cast of striking blues and quasi reds.
In Samson's last-act exchange with his captors, the lighting alternates between one party and the other as if a switch were being flipped: Samson is framed in darkening purple, the Philistines in their customary brightness. Saint-Saens indicates something similar in his music. Indeed, Scene 1 among the Israelites is dry and baritonal. The orchestra and voice ranges begin to lift and luxuriate with Dalila's appearance.
Mr. Hudson's stage is bare of  props. Sliding panels cut on a bias are bathed in, sometimes smeared with, thick brush strokes of paint. Prominent are large, prickly, brightly colored cones sticking up like oversized cactus. The costumes of Abimelech (Alan Held) and the High Priest (Sergei Leiferkus), are spectacular. Hand prints recur as a motif on robes and as body paint.
Mr. Domingo sang so well one can only hope that a lot of his acting was not in earnest. Ms. Graves's husky  mezzo-soprano, with its overt richness and metallic undertones had its moments of real elegance. Saint-Saens's writing for the part tends to be unadorned and thus terribly exposed; at times on Friday, Ms. Graves sounded still undecided as to how certain turns of phrase ought to go.
The supporting principals -- Franz Hawlata, Bernard Fitch, Yanni Yannissis and Matthew Polenzani -- upheld the timbral darkness that runs through this opera. Indeed,  ''Samson'' is in a vocal sense a kind of dusk with Mr. Domingo's more ringing tenor part hovering above it.  Leonard Slatkin conducted with a care and scrupulosity quite in character with the rest of the production.  Control of stage and pit was first-rate. The Met's orchestra played well for him.
SAMSON ET DALILA  Opera in three acts and four tableaux by Camille Saint-Saens, libretto by Ferdinand Lemaire; conductor, Leonard Slatkin; production by Elijah Moshinsky; sets and costumes by Richard Hudson; lighting by Duane Schuler; choreography by Graeme Murphy. At the Metropolitan Opera.
WITH: Denyce Graves (Dalila), Placido Domingo (Samson), Sergei Leiferkus (High Priest), Franz Hawlata (Old Hebrew), Alan Held (Abimelech), Bernard Fitch (First Philistine), Yanni Yannissis (Second Philistine), Matthew Polenzani (Messenger).
OPERA REVIEW
Now she has a major-label debut album, ''Got No Shadow'' (Work/ Sony), and as market niches beckon, Ms. Lord is figuring out how to project on a larger scale. At Westbeth Theater Center on Thursday night, she had a backup band to recreate the arrangements on the album. Her chosen sound is from late 1960's and early 1970's California, the heyday of the Byrds, the Eagles, Linda Ronstadt and Neil Young, when folk-rock took on a touch of country. It's easygoing, clear-cut and noise-free, and it never went away; it's as current as Mary Chapin Carpenter or Sheryl Crow.
For Ms. Lord, it's something to get used to. At Westbeth, her new songs, including some she wrote with Mr. Saloman, deployed all the craftsmanship of their guitar hooks and wistful melodies. She sang about jealousy and lost innocence and doubt; sad songs, she said, were like a vaccine against heartbreak. But while the nuances of her singing come through on the album, she often had to push her voice onstage, using dry Bob Dylan inflections as the band echoed the Byrds.
Songs like Mr. Saloman's ''Lights Are Changing'' are virtually sure-fire, and in quieter songs, like ''Two Boats,'' the band made the music richer. With practice, Ms. Lord is likely to turn into a bandleader. Yet for the moment, she sounded more comfortable alone, fingerpicking and confiding, still diffident and self-deprecating after a decade of performing.
On an EP released in 1995, Ms. Lord sang ''His Indie World,'' a teasing, skeptical insider's catalogue of collegiate rock, reflecting the circles she moved in at the time. At Westbeth, she said, ''Don't hate me,'' and introduced a new version, ''His N.D. World,'' which substitutes alternative-country bands; N.D. stands for No Depression, the alternative-country magazine. Clearly, Ms. Lord recognizes her new position; with luck, she won't let it confine her.  POP REVIEW
This first volume in a projected four-disk series of archival Elgar recordings proves fascinating on several counts. For starters, much of the music is unfamiliar. Though completeness is generally sacrificed, the excerpts from ''The Saga of King Olaf,''  ''The Apostles,''  ''Caractacus'' and ''The Starlight Express'' are rare.
For many listeners, though, the real draw will be the artists featured in this collection of mostly vocal works. There is a veritable who's who of singers from the British Commonwealth, including Clara Butt, Dennis Noble, Harold Williams, Peter Dawson and Kathleen Ferrier.
Although it is hard to pick favorites from such a choice assemblage, some items are especially noteworthy. The Welsh tenor Tudor Davies's clarion performance of ''And King Olaf Heard the Cry'' is thrilling. And two excerpts from the cantata ''Caractacus'' find Dawson, a great Australian bass-baritone, in typically swaggering form.
An unpublished test pressing of Ferrier singing an excerpt from ''The Dream of Gerontius'' (with Gerald Moore at the piano) reminds listeners that this singer's early death deprived the world of a great Elgar interpreter.
And who knew that Haydn Wood, the composer of ''Roses of Picardy,'' found time to arrange and record four Elgar songs?
Indeed, everything on this disk is bound to delight Elgar fans. The only question is when Volume 2 becomes available.
DAVID MERMELSTEIN
Mr. Mosalini is a band leader and arranger, devoted to a pantheon of tango composers including Horacio Salgan, Leopoldo Federico, Anibal Troilo and, most of all, Astor Piazzolla. They transformed dance music into concert music, bringing out tango's shifts of mood and time, ruminating on the tumult behind the grand melodies. Mr. Mosalini has a slightly gentler approach than Mr. Piazzolla, who used the dissonances of Bartok and Stravinsky to bring a sudden chill to his fervent melodies; Mr. Mosalini's music is mercurial, but it always savors an underlying warmth, like the abiding affection of longtime lovers.
His program at Town Hall drew largely on his current album, ''Bordoneo y 900'' (Indigo/Allegro). There were old-fashioned milongas, like Julian Plaza's light-fingered ''Dominguera''; pieces with European classical touches, like the fugal theme of Emilio Balcarce's ''De Contrapunto,'' and jagged, stormy tangos like Piazzolla's ''Lo Que Vendra'' and Salgan's ''A Fuego Lento.''
Mr. Mosalini has taught his musicians, most of them French, the subtleties of tango's timing and dynamics. The tempos were never metronomic; they hastened forward, then relaxed, hesitated and gathered speed again. The soloists, including Mr. Mosalini and Serge Amico on bandoneon, Nicolas Dupin on violin and Fernando Maguna on piano, held the foreground like leading men, ardent and flirtatious, virtuosic but never rushing the moment. And two dancers, Guillermina and Roberto, perfectly embodied the music's implied narratives of desire and elegance, pride and abandon.
MUSIC REVIEW
In Brahms's F major Sonata, he was not quite at the same high level, but probably only because in this work Wendy Chen's clattering piano was more obstructive. His efforts at long-lined lyricism were frustrated by her shortness of breath, and in a work that should be a partnership there simply was no such thing.
The lean beauty of Mr. Chaushian's singing line, and the graceful gravity of his ruminations, came across much better in George Crumb's early unaccompanied Sonata, whose first movement had a very Crumbesque nocturnal sound.
At the end there was Paganini's ''Variations on One String on a Theme by Rossini,'' as adapted by Luigi Silva for the cello's A string rather than the G string of the violin. This is a wonderful piece of nonsense, perhaps more an encore piece than the finale to a recital program, but thoroughly enjoyable here for Mr. Chaushian's darting runs and whistling harmonics.
MUSIC REVIEW
n the 1990's, music executives have become figures as legendary, compelling and often as scandalous as some of the musicians they make their millions from. Fredric Dannen's best-selling ''Hit Men,'' published in 1990, portrayed the industry as a corrupt, misogynist, double-dealing big business run by temperamental crooks. After that book came a highly visible executive mutiny at Warner Brothers, dozens of lavish record deals worth tens of millions of dollars and a heap of copycat exposes, all of which made the behind-the-scenes shenanigans at record companies and the abuse of executive power a permanent part of the public appetite.
As if to answer this hunger in the 90's, Suge Knight rolled into the music industry, a 315-pound banquet cart of scandal who had eight criminal convictions and five contracts on his life in the six years he was an executive before being imprisoned for parole violations last year. The gangsta-rap label he ran, Death Row (once home to Tupac Shakur, Snoop Doggy Dogg and Dr. Dre), upped the ante of music-industry corruption from a sleazy world of payola and sexual harassment to a dangerous battleground where enemies were pistol-whipped or mysteriously disappeared, the label's own artists were beaten at company meetings and contract negotiations were made with baseball bats instead of pens. Equal parts ''The Godfather,'' ''Scarface,'' ''The Mack'' and ''Colors,'' the rise and fall of Death Row is, along with the suicide of Kurt Cobain, one of the most important and tragic stories of pop music in the 90's, culminating in the drive-by shootings of two top rappers, Shakur and the Notorious B.I.G.
And Ronin Ro, a hip-hop writer known for his work with The Source magazine and a previous book on gangsta rap, is the first to try to tell the story completely. ''Have Gun Will Travel'' is a definitive book chronicling the violent world of Death Row. Never has there been a label quite like it. Mr. Ro writes about the label's offices, where messengers and other visitors were known to be robbed: ''If Suge felt someone was trying to cheat him, the offender would be dragged into a storeroom by his goons and pounded to a bloody pulp. Death Row employees went about their filing and faxing as bloodcurdling shrieks filled the office. They saw the doorknob jerking, knowing that people were desperately trying to escape a beating.''
Later, Mr. Ro describes the fate of a record promoter who refused to divulge the home addresses of Mr. Knight's rival, Puffy Combs, and Mr. Combs's mother: he is beaten with champagne bottles and forced to drink Mr. Knight's urine. A pair of rappers who use the phone in Death Row's offices twice without permission are stripped, pistol-whipped and shot at, and an artist leaves Death Row after representatives of his own label threaten him with a gun after he eats a piece of chicken that doesn't belong to him in his backstage dressing room.
With so many beatings, lawsuits, unsolved murders, million-dollar swindles and gang activity surrounding Death Row, it would be hard to write a book on the label that wasn't a page-turner. ''Have Gun Will Travel'' mixes Mr. Ro's own reporting, which relies heavily on the testimony of a few minor players, and his coverage of Mr. Knight's probation hearings, with mostly unattributed quotations that originally appeared in The Source, Vibe and The Los Angeles Times. It is, for the most part, a straight chronological account that reads like a long, well-researched newspaper article with a few juicy rumors thrown in for spice.
Parts of the book appear to have been quickly written: stories are repeated almost verbatim, typographical errors are common and there are moments of sheer stupidity. For example, Mr. Ro says about the street gang the Avenue Cribs: ''During this period there was nothing glamorous (or marketable) about the group. They did not have identifying colors; they didn't commit drive-by shootings.'' After calling drive-bys glamorous and marketable, he goes on to describe shooting off-duty white police officers as macho and the crying of a male in a courtroom as a ''shocking outburst'' because of its femininity, which it may very well be, but only in the homophobic world of rap.
In chronicling Mr. Knight's path from high school athlete to Los Angeles Rams football player to car thief to bodyguard to record executive to convict, Mr. Ro also offers histories of West Coast gangsta rap, Los Angeles street gangs, the political war against gangsta rap lyrics, Death Row rivals like Mr. Combs and imprisoned drug dealers like Michael Harris, who claims to have given the label its seed money.
More interesting than these previously reported incidents, however, is Mr. Ro's indictment of major corporations that did business with Death Row-Sony and then Interscope Records, owned by Time Warner and later sold in part to Seagram. Mr. Ro claims that they knew about Death Row's violent business tactics, watched as its employees were ''threatened and slapped around'' by Death Row thugs and nonetheless ''turned a blind eye to the violence'' so long as money could be made from the rap label, which took in some $100 million annually.
While Death Row's many critics have called the violence that enveloped the company a case of life imitating art, ''Have Gun Will Travel'' shows that the situation was actually much more complex. Sometimes life did imitate art, and sometimes art imitated life; sometimes success bred greed, and sometimes bad tempers were mistaken for good business sense. But most of the time the problems that plagued Death Row were a result of the street following the label into the corporate world. Mr. Ro traces conflicts to their origins in fighting between rival Los Angeles street gangs, the Crips and the Bloods, which each had members in the entourages of rappers and executives and whose members regularly hung out in the Death Row studio and offices, the Crips on the right side and the Bloods on the left.
What the book lacks is perspective. Death Row records is never placed anywhere in the context of rap music as a whole. There is no evidence of the appreciation of the music that Mr. Ro clearly has, and the label is never put in its place in relation to the corrupt midcentury independent music labels that had mafia and gangster connections themselves. ''Have Gun Will Travel'' is just fact after fact, quotation after quotation, although that has its fascination. But the story is not complete: major characters like Snoop Doggy Dogg have broken their silence on the label since the writing of this book, and others like Suge Knight have yet to come clean. There is still another, better book to be written.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
But in more demanding works by Chopin, Liszt and Debussy, Mr. Watts became the imperious virtuoso again, with less uniformly happy results. At times this pianist seems a captive to his technique, almost audibly shifting into overdrive at the slightest hint of difficulty or opportunity for display.
Things can sound a bit frenetic, sloppy and, in such confined quarters, clangorous, as happened here in Chopin's F minor Fantasy and, to a lesser extent, elsewhere. It all seems so unnecessary, given his lofty gifts, and yet it has obviously not hampered his career.
There were, in any case, beauties large and small in Chopin's F major Ballade and in Debussy's ''Jardins Sous la Pluie'' and ''Isle Joyeuse.'' Mr. Watts generally shows a fine ear for Liszt's poetry, as he did here in the second version of ''La Lugubre Gondola'' No. 2 and in ''Les Jeux d'Eau a la Villa d'Este.''
He is to perform some of the same works tomorrow, back in a giant hall, at the New Jersey Center for the Performing Arts in Newark.
MUSIC REVIEW
Arturo Toscanini was unabashed about his own pre-eminence in the opera house. When coaching singers individually, he was respectful and helpful. But on the podium before the public, ''the opera was his and his alone,'' Emma Eames, the great American soprano, recounted in her memoir, which the critic Peter G.  Davis quotes in his fascinating new book, ''The American Opera Singer.''
Once the performance started, Eames reported, Toscanini ''detached himself from us thereafter and interpreted his opera, even singing with us so loudly that one heard him on the stage.'' His conducting, she added, ''was not an accompaniment but a stone wall of resistance to any personality but his own.''
That heritage was maintained to various degrees by Karl Bohm, Georg Solti, Herbert von Karajan and others of their generation. But today, for the most part, opera conductors have lost such dominance. Riccardo Muti, at La Scala in Milan, still clings to the Toscanini approach, all but banning star singers who question his authority. James Levine, at the Met, is Mr. Muti's opposite: a conductor whose commanding vision has been central to the achievement of the company in the last two decades but who genuinely relishes working with strong singer colleagues. He has been known to accommodate important singers even at the expense of his own judgment.
In view of the diminished clout of opera conductors, therefore, especially with record companies, four new recordings are notable: Wagner's ''Walkure,'' conducted by Christoph von Dohnanyi (London 440 371-2; four CD's); Strauss's ''Elektra,'' conducted by Giuseppe Sinopoli (Deutsche Grammophon 453 429-2; two CD's); Strauss's ''Frau Ohne Shatten,'' also with Mr. Sinopoli (Teldec 0630-13156-2; three CD's), and Verdi's ''Lombardi,'' conducted by Mr. Levine (London 455 287-2; two CD's).
Although there are some star singers among the casts, these performances are defined by their conductors, without whose intense involvement the recordings would never have happened, especially ''Die Walkure.''
Dohnanyi's 'Walkure'
Mr. Dohnanyi's directorship of the Cleveland Orchestra has been impressive. A probing and accomplished musician, the conductor, born in Germany with a distinguished Hungarian musical heritage, presides over one of America's most skilled, sonorous and responsive orchestras. He clearly wants to leave for posterity an account of Wagner's ''Ring'' cycle, a touchstone work for any conductor, with the Cleveland Orchestra, and his ''Walkure'' is the second installment of the four operas in the cycle, with ''Das Rheingold'' already available.
The conductor brings magisterial scope, a keen ear for telling detail, and an uncanny control of dynamics to his work here. The orchestra plays with virtuosic technique, impressive textural clarity and vibrant color. The extended final scene, in which Wotan lays Brunnhilde to rest atop a mountain surrounded by crackling, impenetrable flames, is serene and luminous.
The problem is the cast. These are mostly good artists and gifted singers who in a stage performance would provide some rewards. But with several classic ''Ring'' cycles available on CD, this cast is hard to justify for a recording.
Poul Elming, a Danish tenor as Siegmund, has a nice, beefy heroic tenor voice, but his performance does not grab the listener. There is a boorish quality to his conception of the role, which lacks much sense of a despairing young man who blames himself for having been abandoned by his father. The American dramatic soprano Alessandra Marc, who sings Sieglinde, has yet to live up to her early promise, and this performance is no exception. Her voice is essentially vibrant in character, but her singing is often scoopy, unsteady and unattractive.
The Brunnhilde, the German soprano Gabriele Schnaut, is reliable and solid but not much more. Robert Hale, the American bass, fares better as Wotan, bringing a baritonal lyricism to his singing, but he lacks the expressive depth for a truly memorable portrayal. Fricka is sung by Anja Silja, Mr. Dohnanyi's wife and an estimable artist, captured way past her vocal prime. There is a wealth of knowledge in her work, but the singing is sad to hear.
Plans to record the final two operas have been stalled while Decca/London, along with the rest of the opera world, awaits a tenor who can sing the intimidating role of Siegfried in a way that merits documentation. But the label has just reissued the classic Solti ''Ring'' on remastered disks, so no one will be surprised if Mr. Dohnanyi's hope to complete the cycle goes unrealized. Still, Mr. Dohnanyi's clout is clear: London Records gave the go-ahead to ''Die Walkure,'' even without a cast on board that merited being recorded.
Sinopoli's 'Elektra'
Mr. Sinopoli is obviously the inspiration behind the new recording of ''Elektra'' with the Vienna Philharmonic. He has always been a hard conductor to pin down. Though a composer and a former medical student with a brilliant intellect, Mr. Sinopoli is capable of erratic and inexplicable work. But here he is possessed. In the incandescent passages, the tempos are daringly fast; elsewhere, his pacing is roomy and deliberate. A clear sense of direction and shape is at work, and he elicits lucid textures, brilliant execution and shimmering colors from the orchestra.
The cast is uneven but adequate. Ms. Marc sings the title role, and although her voice is prone to stridency and chancy high notes, such rawness is arguably appropriate to the demonic Elektra, hellbent on avenging the death of her father. Birgit Nilsson, on her renowned London recording conducted by Solti, proved that it is also possible to sing the role gloriously, but Ms. Marc has her moments of affecting, vaultingly phrased vocalism.
Deborah Voigt, in radiant voice, is a thrilling Chrysothemis. Hanna Schwarz sings Klytemnestra with dramatic intensity, though her pitch is iffy in her low register. Samuel Ramey is a bit stolid as Orest, but his husky bass rings out compellingly.
More attention might have been paid to coaching the vocalists for accuracy and consistency of delivery. In the end, for all the sheer excitement, when Mr. Sinopoli starts whipping up the orchestra, the singers sound a bit abandoned.
Sinopoli's 'Frau'
Mr. Sinopoli's recording of ''Die Frau Ohne Schatten'' is taken from several live performances in late 1996 with the Staatskapelle Dresden. Since its premiere in 1919, this fairy-tale opera has both enchanted and perplexed listeners.
The story is deeply mystical: an Emperor, hunting one day, grazes the neck of a white gazelle, which turns into a fairy princess, whom he marries. But the Empress lacks a shadow, signifying the netherland in which she lives, between the animal and human worlds. Her maid, a Mephistophelean character, tries to strike a bargain for the Empress with the young, somewhat crude wife of a poor village dyer: in exchange for her shadow, the dyer's wife will receive jewels and riches.
Strauss and his librettist, Hugo von Hofmannsthal, considered this opera their ''Magic Flute,'' and in its way the work is just as awkward as Mozart's beloved opera: half morality tale and half lowbrow farce.
Yet the score contains some of Strauss's most imaginative, harmonically inventive and lyrically rhapsodic music. Mr. Sinopoli conducts with bold character and gossamer transparency. There is a Mendelssohnian charm to his account.
Yet he conducts a version of the score essentially adopting the cuts taken by Bohm, a champion of the work, in his classic Deutsche Grammophon recording with Leonie Rysanek as the Empress and Birgit Nilsson as the Dyer's Wife. ''Die Frau'' has problems that make it difficult to bring off in the opera house; but the problems are not solved by the cuts, and the full score holds together better musically, as the complete versions by Solti on London and Wolfgang Sawallisch on EMI make clear.
Moreover, Mr. Sinopoli's cast is distressingly uneven. The tenor Ben Heppner is a vocally resplendent Emperor, perhaps the best on record. Ms. Voigt, though not captured at her best, is a riveting Empress. But Ms. Schwarz, as the scheming Nurse, sings with wobbly tone and roughness. And Sabine Hass, as the Dyer's Wife, is hard to take, with her tremulous sound, questionable pitch, and stridency.
With a more consistent cast, Mr. Sinopoli might have presented a fine studio recording of the work complete. Was Teldec simply placating a strong-willed international conductor by hastily releasing this live performance? So it seems.
Levine's 'Lombardi'
Mr. Levine takes firm command in ''I Lombardi'' with the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra and Chorus. But here is a case of a conductor who works splendidly with his cast, bringing the best out of everybody, and compensating for the flaws of the one weak link. And this opera, Verdi's fourth, needs all the conductorial help it can get.
First performed in 1843, ''I Lombardi'' is an inconsistent work of a genius-in-progress. This convoluted story of rival brothers, a mistaken murder and the seduction of a sister-in-law, set against the background of 11th-century Milan and the Crusades, evokes long stretches of music rich with lyrical grandeur and hints of the Verdi to come. But there are also misjudgments. A chorus of cutthroats, muttering music in which foursquare phrases end with brassy, slicing two-chord cadences, is meant to be ominous but comes off sounding silly. When Verdi recycled much of this opera for ''Jerusalem,'' in 1847, he used the chorus (with a new text) as a drinking song, to far greater effect.
But Mr. Levine conducts every moment of this score with such vitality, crisp rhythm and expressive nuance that a listener is too engrossed to dwell on the music's shortcomings. The Met orchestra produces spitfire energy and, where called for, expansive elegance. And the singers are galvanized by Mr. Levine's fervor.
The recording took place in September 1996, and Luciano Pavarotti, who sings Oronte, the son of a tyrant from Antioch, is in good voice. His sound is ringing and free; he approaches the full-voiced high notes sensibly and nails them. His clear diction beautifully matches the sound of the text to the shape of the musical line. Put a score in front of this famously lazy tenor, prone to memory lapses, and he can still deliver.
Mr. Ramey and the tenor Richard Leech are excellent as the feuding brothers. Of the leads, only the soprano June Anderson, as Oronte's beloved Giselda, is disappointing. She seems to be striving for ethereal, finespun phrasing, with scant vibrato, but it mostly comes out thin, wavy in pitch and mannered.
London Records no doubt hopes that Mr. Pavarotti, whose picture is on the cover, will sell this recording. Yet the achievement is Mr. Levine's. This is a performance led by a commanding musician attentive to the needs of his singers but determined to shape them, and this ungainly piece, into something approximating a great Verdi opera.
RECORDINGS VIEW
Ms. Glennie, who was born on a farm in Aberdeen, has created an international phenomenon: the show biz percussion recital, bringing new solo percussion works and style to audiences ready to make them welcome.  They like the helicopter in which her husband (her sound engineer) flies her to rehearsal, and her name painted in snazzy red on her instrument truck, and especially her theatrical command of the battery.
The 1997 winner of the Pulitzer Prize in music, Christopher Rouse, is among many composers rushing to infuse this fledgling repertory with concertos or solos for her. Next winter she tours the United States with Pro Musica Nipponia, introducing a new work for marimba and traditional Japanese instruments. She herself has made percussion transcriptions ranging from Vivaldi to Steppenwolf.
Next week, with the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra led by Eiji Oue, Ms. Glennie will introduce to New Jersey James MacMillan's striking ''Veni, Veni, Emmanuel.'' Composed by a fellow Scot in 1992, it combines internal spirituality and worldly musical display.
Compared with concerts on other instruments, percussion offers plenty to look at even if you can't hear, which Ms. Glennie cannot very well, having suffered a mysterious hearing loss after an illness at age 11. She refuses most requests for interviews in person, but speaks on the phone through a translator. The impairment, which she wishes would no longer be described in her media packets, has been a significant element in her publicity, and is unfailingly mentioned in articles and reviews.
The prototypical deaf musician is Beethoven, but unlike Beethoven, Ms. Glennie is not stone deaf. In any case, her constructive, determined use of intelligence has helped her find ways to get around her disability, starting with her choice of instruments.
Percussion timbre is created by striking and stroking, which can be regulated through sight and touch. Pitch, as opposed to string and wind tone, is fixed, from marimba to abundant rhythm instruments. Beyond drums, bells and rattles, many things are used for percussion -- shells, cans, pipes, pots and buckets of water are homey examples. (Timpani, tuned by the player, are not used in the solo part of the MacMillan and Rouse concertos.)
Ms. Glennie also compensates for diminished hearing by sharp eyesight, concentration, agility and receptiveness to texture and vibration. (She wears no shoes in concert, because floor vibrations enhance her sensitivity to pitch and rhythm. In fact, ''Good Vibrations'' is the title of her autobiography.) She also played some piano at her Lincoln Center recital, in a remarkable role reversal with Philip Smith, her usual recital pianist, who moved over to a cluster of instruments that Ms. Glennie called ''a little multi-setup.''
To these assets add showy costumes, New Age lighting, style, wit -- Ms. Glennie reads lips and addresses audiences in a charming accent -- and then if there's a hearing shortfall, well, in the percussion world a certain amount of hearing loss sooner or later is just an occupational hazard.
As a teen-ager, Ms. Glennie wore a hearing aid, but gave it up when she became disturbed that it boosted volume at the expense of clarity. After a BBC Symphony performance sequence televised on ''60 Minutes,'' Ed Bradley told his audience that she had come in right on cue. Ms. Glennie promptly teased him: ''How do you know it was on cue?''
Demonstrating unusual instruments to Mr. Bradley in her studio, she explained that she doesn't have to look at Philip Smith when he accompanies her: ''He's there.  I know what he's playing. How he's playing I'm not so sure.''
Aside from the marimba, on which Ms. Glennie flashed through ''Flight of the Bumblebee,'' her recital did not display the melodic properties of percussion. Though the MacMillan concerto is based on plainsong, its sustained lines, such as they are, are carried by other orchestral sections.
Her performance of it under Leonard Slatkin at Avery Fisher Hall two years ago was reviewed in this newspaper as ''what may stand as the most thrilling moment in the New York Philharmonic season.'' In that concert, she hurried, barefoot, from one multi-setup to another, sometimes in front of the conductor, sometimes crossing hands in loving, dextrous battle with gong, foot drum and wind catcher. At the finish, she slowly climbed a stage-rear scaffold to ring chimes, spotlighted in the darkened hall.
The closing image of the segment on ''60 Minutes'' captured Ms. Glennie's tireless striving, as she sat on the side of a bed in a lonely hotel room, intently blowing on a chanter from a Highlands bagpipe.
NEW JERSEY SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA
Eiji Oue, conductor, Evelyn Glennie, percussion
State Theater, 19 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick, March 26, 8 P.M. Crescent Theater, 50 North Clinton Avenue, Trenton, March 27, 8:30 PM. New Jersey Performing Arts Center, 1 Center Street, Newark, March 28, 8 P.M. and March 29, 3 P.M.
(800) 255-3470
MUSIC REVIEW  Correction:  March 22, 1998, Sunday  A listing in the On the Towns pages last Sunday for the percussionist Evelyn Glennie's concerts with the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra this Thursday through Sunday misstated the telephone number for tickets. It is (800) 255-3476.
The project was the exact inverse of a track date, a dance-music staple in which a live singer (lately Madonna at the Roxy) performs to canned music. Call it ''Elvis: The Afterlife,'' or ''Elvis: The Simulation.'' Actually, it was ''Elvis: The Replay.'' Even some of the applause was on tape.
Replays aren't for surprises. They are a way to pick up nuances that were missed the first time around, as an event turns into an artifact. The performances were familiar to Presley devotees; they were from tour films made in 1970 and 1972, outtakes released in 1992 and the 1973 television show ''Elvis: Aloha From Hawaii, via Satellite.'' There he was one more time, mostly in white jumpsuits, on screen with the rhinestones as big as footballs. His left leg was shaking; his eyes were full of invitations and dares, when they weren't bleary.
His voice was strong in the early 1970's, a baritone full of relaxed power, though he sometimes added a corny vibrato for pop songs. When he touched down in the blues or rockabilly, he was the indelible Elvis: confident and amused, yet in touch with resentful growls or lovesick moans. Unlike anyone else around, he was determined to embrace a whole spectrum of American popular music. He sang gospel, country and blues standards alongside the most sentimental pop, which he delivered with quivering sincerity and then set aside with a grin.
Even in the busy Las Vegas-style arrangements Presley used in the 1970's, the four-piece rock band at the core of the music stayed on its toes, particularly when James Burton reeled off sleekly curlicued country guitar solos. On Friday night, the group went out of sync during Presley's perfunctory run-through of ''All Shook Up,'' but quickly recovered.
And in ''Polk Salad Annie,'' when Presley had the whim to toy with the syllable ''polk'' as an experiment in syncopation, the band genially tossed offbeats back at him. The two vocal groups were still in good form, with Mr. Sumner intoning cavernous bass notes and the Sweet Inspirations teasing at the border of soul and gospel.
But a Presley concert was always something more than a musical event. It was an encounter with a phenomenon who was radiating charisma and teasing at his own stardom, raising pheromone levels dangerously high. He dabbed at his sweat and handed out the moistened scarves like holy relics; he sacrificed ''Love Me Tender'' to a ritual of kissing the pretty women who swarmed toward the stage.
The video Elvis couldn't make that kind of contact, even with a crowd eager to suspend disbelief. Sure-fire crowd pleasers like ''An American Trilogy'' brought part of the audience to its feet, and the multiple crescendos in ''Suspicious Minds'' were reminders of his mastery as a front man. But in the end, his presence simply couldn't be resurrected.
By the way, there is no corroboration for rumors that samples of Presley's DNA are being worked over to produce a clone -- or multiple clones -- to be ready to tour as the young, vital Elvis around the 40th anniversary of his death, in 2017. But to the ears of promoters, ''Elvis: The Reincarnation'' must have a nice ring.
POP REVIEW
Ms. Souriau, who has led her group in New York for three years, had the band members pat their chests percussively, whistle and sing. And when they played their instruments, they produced orchestral music that moved from the classical to the film world, finishing up with jungle-period Ellington.
Ms. Souriau arranges her rhythm section wisely, and on ''Moonday'' the pianist Aaron Goldberg, the bassist Dennis Irwin and the drummer Jeff Ballard set up an ostinato that fit into the snap of the musicians patting their chests. Ms. Souriau isn't particularly interested in the traditional role for soloists, and several of her tunes used improvisers almost incidentally; the colors and rhythms and melodies of the pieces were the point. She had the band end one piece with buzzing long tones. Another had modern interlocking patterns broken up by West Coast polyphony, with the saxophones intertwined.
As a conductor, Ms. Souriau dances. She shuffled back and forth in front of the band and urged it on with her arms waiving. The music, loaded with melodies and moist harmonies, was in search of the ecstatic moment, and it mostly found it.  JAZZ REVIEW
He seemed more settled in the attractive Bolcom pieces and in Rachmaninoff's Variations on a Theme of Chopin, getting around the keyboard with flash, dazzle and a more substantial touch. If he failed to generate the full excitement that the Rachmaninoff has to offer, it is also true that for anyone who loves Chopin's C minor Prelude, Rachmaninoff's expansion of it begins at a disadvantage, lopping off the evanescent repetition of the second half and turning the piece foursquare as fodder for variation.
Mr. Tiu, who was born in the Philippines and was named a laureate of the 1996 Esther Honens Calgary International Piano Competition, is a gifted pianist and perhaps a thoughtful one. That he is a less-than-finished artist may not be greatly worrisome at this early stage.
JAMES R. OESTREICH
MUSIC REVIEW
Seen in repertory terms, Mr. Schiff's visit represented a contraction of horizons: the orchestra's programs, and Mr. Schiff's performances, focused on Brahms and Schumann. A listener on Saturday evening was tempted to regard the closing concert almost as an extension of the mini-Brahms festival with which Kurt Masur opened the season. Mr. Masur opened the concert with Brahms's Variations on a Theme by Haydn, and closed it with Schumann's Second Symphony.
Mr. Schiff's vehicle was the Schumann Concerto in A. In a way, the work's warhorse status was its central challenge to both Mr. Schiff and Mr. Masur: when the work at hand is so ubiquitous that audiences and performers can sing it in their sleep, the trick is to keep the performance from sounding as if that's what's happening.
Mr. Schiff has never been one to perform on autopilot, and as he sharpened accents and gave Schumann's tempos an impetuous push, one was put in mind of similar moves he made in Bach and Mozart works early in his career. Mr. Schiff produced a reading that seemed fresh and slightly provocative, but fully justifiable. As much as he manipulated Schumann's line, nothing he did seemed to be merely for the sake of creating an empty effect.
Mr. Masur and the orchestra fully supported Mr. Schiff's views, and brought their own fresh touches to the Second Symphony. Schumann's orchestral writings can be puzzling at times, both in terms of orchestration and in their tendency toward self-indulgent meandering. Mr. Masur's reading was not sufficient to cover these flaws, and some muddiness in the brass seemed to point up the eccentricities in the scoring as much as the weaknesses in that section of the orchestra. Yet there were some splendid touches here, particularly in the careful detailing of the first movement and in the hard-driven, vibrant account of the Scherzo.
MUSIC REVIEW
Any questions about whether a conventional rock setup would dilute Ms. Amos's idiosyncratic art were erased the moment she took her place between her piano and a synthesizer. Her band -- Steve Caton on guitar, Jon Evans on bass and Matt Chamberlin on drums -- was already cultivating a raucous noise. Ms. Amos let the band support her as she played both keyboards and experimented with vocal techniques, her patented high wails giving way to grunts and syncopated phrasings.
A hard-rock element has always been crucial in tempering Ms. Amos's sometimes frilly tone, but on Thursday night she let her virile side dominate. Those steroids were not as strong as the musical arrangements showing the influence of sharp-edged bands like Garbage, as well as the classic art-rock of Peter Gabriel and ''Scary Monsters''-era David Bowie. She also incorporated modern funk; her affinity with Prince showed, and during ''God,'' she vamped on ''You Dropped a Bomb on Me'' by the Gap Band, substituting ''Jesus'' for the song's obligatory ''Baby.'' Through all these turns, the band gave Ms. Amos room to move while still challenging her.
Reworking old material or trying out her bold new work, Ms. Amos stayed true to her mission: the pursuit of a fully female expression as intense as the heroic rock of bands like Led Zeppelin. This quest takes Ms. Amos into the realm of goddess-oriented legends, but also into a common sexual and emotional history. She has built a mythos of the parlor, the parked car and the basement room, charting the rhythms of womanly sensuality to suit lyrics about orgasm and childbirth, human loss and spiritual ecstasy. Now she is giving greater rein to the masculine side women also possess. Her zeal for this new heroic labor was palpable and potent. It wasn't just the drugs.
POP REVIEW
Moses Asch, Folkways's founder and guiding intelligence, released 2,168 albums and doggedly kept them all in print. At the concert, snippets were played from albums of tree-frog sounds and readings of Frederick Douglass, along with Leadbelly, Woody Guthrie and the Pygmies of the Ituri rain forest. The concert had no frogs, but it did span banjo tunes and Puerto Rican plenas, desegregation anthems and a New Orleans brass band playing ''When the Saints Go Marching In.''
The Smithsonian Institution took over Folkways after Mr. Asch's death in 1986. Reflecting the museum connections of Smithsonian Folkways (the label's new name), the concert had nearly as much explanation as music.
Mickey Hart of the Grateful Dead gave a mini-lecture on field recording with exhibits including an Edison cylinder phonograph. Theodore Bikel and Ossie Davis expounded on Folkways as a model for grass-roots independent labels, as a source and spur for folk revivals, and as a disseminator of ethnic music (paying ethnomusicologists a $100 flat fee for an album). It also grew clear that Folkways is the legacy of a well-meaning American left, committed to tolerance, civil rights and peace, for which folk music reaffirmed the dignity of distant strangers and the warmth of a community sing.
Though they were surrounded by talk, the performances were vivid. Ms. Jenkins's albums for children helped keep Folkways solvent and, judging by a sing-along, nurtured many audience members. She demonstrated variants of a children's chant, including one she learned from a 5-year-old and its politically correct revisions; she also played an ornate, reverent ''Go Down, Moses'' on the harmonica. Ulali, three American Indian women, sang traditional songs with crisp three-part harmonies and voices that swooped and ululated with startling intensity.
Lucinda Williams sang two plaintive but hard-headed songs from the albums she made for Folkways in 1978 and 1980. Dar Williams (no relation) sang ''The Christians and the Pagans,'' about a 1990's family reunion complete with a lesbian witch, and Mr. Seeger's ''Turn, Turn, Turn,'' with Mr. Seeger and the audience on choruses.
The New Lost City Ramblers, urban revivalists of rural music, carried one tune from the Appalachians to the bayou. Ralph Stanley, a bluegrass patriarch, sang about constant sorrow in a high, eerie voice full of troubled knowledge, and played brisk, sprightly banjo. Bernice Johnson Reagon and her daughter Toshi shared an unhurried spiritual, promising strength and comfort as their voices intertwined.
The current lineup of the SNCC Freedom Singers, which Ms. Reagon helped to found in 1962, sang civil-rights classics like ''We Shall Not Be Moved,'' building momentum like a gospel quartet. Los Pleneros de la 21 linked Puerto Rican bombas and plenas to salsa, pushed along by a horn section, and the Mahogany Brass Band paraded onstage and down the aisles. Mr. Bikel sang Russian and Yiddish songs with dramatic fervor.
Mr. Seeger, of course, had the last word, mixing tradition and topicality. He drew a feminist lesson from an Appalachian song about a wife who's tougher than Lucifer; he had a version of ''Buffalo Skinners'' with words about a strike at a McDonald's in Ohio. He played ''The Cuckoo'' with Ms. Jenkins on harmonica, and then, for the finale, led a sing-along on the gospel standard ''Amen.''
With the brass band providing horns and rhythm, and the other musicians and audience joining in, Mr. Seeger sang ''amen,'' then ''freedom,'' then ''union,'' and preached some watchwords Folkways would endorse: ''A world in harmony.''
POP REVIEW
The story is based on events in the life of the 17th-century Ukrainian separatist Ivan Mazeppa, who allied himself with Czar Peter of Russia and served as a Cossack overlord in Ukraine until he turned on the Czar, started a rebellion and was put down. Today, of course, Mazeppa is viewed in Ukraine as a hero of nationalism.
Tchaikovsky essentially ignores the history, instead portraying Mazeppa as an overreaching, though charismatic, opportunist who abandons his principles and his rightful ruler. For the composer to suggest otherwise in the Russia of 1884 would have been foolhardy.
The history may be skewed, but the psychology of the story, as made vivid here by Tchaikovsky's remarkable music, is insightful and convincing. The score has plenty of swashbuckling energy. Mazeppa's visit to the estate of his Cossack ally Kochubey is celebrated with a stirring chorus and exuberant ballet music that gives the Kirov's male dancers a chance to show off their astonishing leaps. The battle of Poltava that depicts the eventual showdown between Mazeppa and the czarist forces is evoked in a driving symphonic sequence, complete with an onstage battalion of brass players.
But most of the score is given to extended, reflective scenes between the main characters where the battles are internal. Mazeppa, a stolid man of 70, falls deeply for Kochubey's young daughter Maria. Intriguingly, Maria loves everything about him: his maturity, his wizened appearance, his deep voice. Their music, expansively lyrical yet pungent with shifting harmonies, conveys the ambiguity. Does Mazeppa truly love Maria, or is he using his charisma to ensnare her? Does Maria perceive nobility in Mazeppa's soul, or is she an unstable adolescent with a father complex?
The operatic need for love duets between a tenor and a soprano is fulfilled here by Tchaikovsky's invention of a character, Andrei, a young Cossack who adores Maria unrequitedly. Later, when Maria's father goes to the Czar to expose Mazeppa's true intentions, he is condemned to death for maligning Peter's overlord. Rushing to save him, Maria is too late, and slips into madness.
In the opera's most daring touch, Maria sings an eerie lullaby over the body of Andrei, who has died in battle, thinking him her unborn child. With this unhinged yet strangely angelic music the opera ends.
Mr. Gergiyev is obviously enthralled with this piece and, despite the heavy schedule his company is maintaining, he inspired impassioned, authoritative and sonorous playing from the orchestra and robust singing from the chorus. The great baritone Nikolai Putilin is a vocally imposing and dramatically involving Mazeppa.
The bass voice of Vladimir Vaneyev, who sings Kochubey, is a bit gravelly and unsteady, but his portrayal is powerful and humane. Olga Guryakova brings her cool, clear soprano voice, youthful beauty and affecting vulnerability to the role of Maria. The plaintive-voiced tenor Yuri Marusin is a sympathetic Andrei. And Lyudmila Shemchuk's molten mezzo-soprano makes her an ideal Lyubov, Kochubey's tormented wife.
The colorful sets, mostly painted flats, have a kind of pop-up storybook quality. When Maria hugged a tree in her father's garden, it wiggled. But they do the job. The costumes are elaborate and striking. There may not be another opportunity soon coming to experience this great work performed with such linguistic and cultural authority. The final performances are tonight, tomorrow and Thursday.  OPERA REVIEW
Confused? The American Festival of Microtonal Music came to the rescue with its annual two-day festival, which opened on Thursday night at St. Paul's Chapel of Columbia University.
Lou Harrison's tender Suite No. 2 for microtonal guitars, skillfully played by John Schneider, made you forget all about the concept and listen to the music. Its mixture of the Spanish-inflected dances and elegies with the slightly ''off'' quality of the pungent microtonal harmonies, echoing in the reverberant chapel, was a delight.
The other intriguing work was ''Atom Turning in the Sun of Eternity,'' a dramatic cantata, of sorts, by Sasha Bogdanowitsch for vocalist-actor (the composer in bare feet and white robe) and instruments either played or tuned microtonally, including harps, guitars, marimba, flute and cello. The vocal text of made-up syllables, which sounded like some primal earthy language, tells a vague fable of searching for a beloved. Mr. Bogdanowitsch sang the melismatic vocal line with chantlike elegance. The pleasant, quietly undulant music is awash with Pacific Rim exotica, but it had a kind of winning authenticity.
Virgil Moorefield's ''(Slight Return)'' was anything but quiet, a work of blasts and bursts for electronic instruments. A microtonal version for viola, guitar and cello of Avro Part's modal, moody ''Frates'' proved ineffective. The repetitive minimalistic figures for viola, as played by Anatasia Solberg, just sounded raw and out of tune. Ms. Solberg was quite effective in ''Din Cinpoiu,'' a long work for solo viola by Violeta Dinescu, but the music was a nondescriptive series of scrapings, noodlings and nothings.
The longest work was ''Adam and Eve,'' by Johnny Reinhard, a caterwauling, self-indulgent musical drama depicting the story from Genesis of the fall from grace, with a dancer (Christina Coppola) as Eve; the composer, on bassoon, as Adam; a cellist (David Eggar) as the Tree of Knowledge, and a roster of other good sports on gongs, drums, guitars and whatnot. The use of microtones did not turn this silly piece into something innovative.
MUSIC REVIEW  Correction:  May 13, 1998, Wednesday  A music review yesterday about the first concert in the American Festival of Microtonal Music on Thursday at St. Paul's Chapel at Columbia University referred incorrectly to one of the works on the program. Virgil Moorfield's ''(Slight Return)'' is scored for violin, cello, baritone sax, electric guitar and a synthesizer, not solely for electronic instruments.
From there, Japanese influence was traceable mainly by descent: Messiaen's ''Regard de l'Etoile'' and ''Premiere Communion de la Vierge,'' while miles from ''Images,'' create their mystical aura by using opaque harmonies that owe much to Debussy. They also have a forcefulness and concision that are explored further in Pierre Boulez's aphoristic (one might almost say haikulike) ''Notations,'' the centerpiece of the closing section of the concert, played by Cheryl Tschanz.
That may be a stretch, and there seems no way to draw the other work Ms. Tschanz played -- Ravel's quasi-Viennese ''Valses Nobles et Sentimentales'' -- into this particularly cross-cultural picture. Ms. Tschanz gave an incisive, hard-driving account of the Boulez and an appealing, nuanced reading of the Ravel.
In the section of the program devoted to Japanese works, Mariko Sato gave persuasive accounts of Tonika Ichinose's ''Gyre'' (1996) and Izumi Nakagawa's ''Live'' (1998). Ms. Ichinose's work is in a post-Minimalist style that calls to mind the gentle wanderings of Somei Satoh. It is based on a repeated and slowly transformed rising six-note figure upon which thickening layers of counterpoint are overlaid.
Ms. Nakagawa's four-movement suite ranged more widely. Its opener, ''Chattering,'' closed the circle of influences by drawing on both a Debussian haziness and, in a more dramatic section, more pointed harmonies that edged toward Messiaen. Touches of Ravel and Chopin, with more up-to-date twists, drifted through the ''Meditating Forest'' movement. ''Work Song'' had a jazziness that was rooted in Leonard Bernstein's theater music but spiced with kakegoe, a Japanese style of vocalization. And the finale, ''Lullaby,'' had a soft edge that hinted at Debussy or Faure.  MUSIC REVIEW
''The Spider and the Fly'' acts out Mary Howitt's familiar children's poem. The Fly (Hila Plitmann) becomes a shrill and murderous-sounding soprano; the Spider (Nathan Gunn) plays a dark seducer. Emulated in spirit is the lighter-than-air whimsy -- the sophisticated naivete, if you will -- of a Poulenc or a Satie.
The facts are a little noisier. At moments, ''Das Rheingold'' meets Nelson Riddle. At others, Richard Strauss sings sweetly, Gershwin rollicks, jazz syncopates. One does not begrudge Mr. Del Tredici his eclecticism, but one looks too strenuously for an identifying voice in this grab bag of materials. We are treated to the composer as disk jockey. One discovers Mr. Del Tredici's personality not in the music he writes but in his tastes for the styles of others.
Sequences are major helpers here: repeating patterns that inch their way up or circle downward and then fall away. The composer's ideas seem helpless without them. Ms. Plitmann is asked to occupy unpleasant heights and fill them with ornament and shrieking expletives. She makes a brave performance of it. Mr. Gunn's part is more comfortable.
Both voices are amplified, which is a ghastly mistake. Created are mutually exclusive sound worlds: orchestral glitter next to hollow, muffled loudspeaker color. If the amplification is intended to make words and vocal line clearer, it achieves the opposite. This is only one of the phenomena that make ''The Spider and the Fly'' seem spacey and misguided at one moment, harmless and entertaining at the next. Mr. Del Tredici's music couldn't hurt a fly, even if Howitt's poem can.
It was an odd evening, brightened by Copland's Clarinet Concerto commissioned by Benny Goodman. Stanley Drucker, who was celebrating 50 years with the orchestra, played it ardently. Indeed, performer and composer provided concision and clarity enough to scrub the messy residue of the Del Tredici piece from our ears. Elsewhere, Philip Myers gave a smooth performance of Mozart's modest E-Flat Horn Concerto, and Adolph Herseth (his orchestra  career began 50 years ago as well) was joined by Philip Smith in a Vivaldi C major Concerto for two trumpets.
It is fashionable to belittle Vivaldi these days, but perhaps we should listen to him as we would the best of rock-and-roll, looking not for harmonic sophistication or breadth of expression but for the honesty of emotion and the capacity to exhilarate. The evening ended with ''La  Valse.'' Reducing Ravel's Technicolor brilliance to militant, tough-sounding orderliness is quite a feat, but  Mr. Masur managed to do it. The concert repeats tonight.  CLASSICAL REVIEW
The choral sections changed weight, sometimes having Mr. Rizo singing against the rest of the group, along with percussion. Or he sang against just the other singers; sometimes all the singers, thickening the sound, sang together; and when the drummers joined in, the music felt heavy, loaded with seriousness and elegance.
Pancho Quinto, sitting on a percussion instrument, a wooden box called a cajon, chose his spots carefully. He hit the box with a plastic rattle, then stopped. With a set of spoons, he slapped at a metal bell, then stopped.
He used silence and space, and when the music needed a deep thump, he aimed a shot at the box. Some of the better percussionists in New York joined the band every so often, including Patato Valdez and Horacio (El Negro) Hernandez, and the flutist and saxophonist Jane Bunnett appeared for several solos. The rumbas became jam sessions. And if the music wasn't always focused, it opened up, with Pancho Quinto commenting slyly from the side.  MUSIC REVIEW
Mr. Coomes and Ms. Weiss sparred and rallied, his unkempt chord changes given shape by her exacting, tenacious rhythms. The Roxichord showed signs of injury from Mr. Coomes's full-on assaults: he leaped onto the instrument or played with his sneaker-clad foot when not using more conventional fingerings. His sweet-tart melodies suggested the Kinks, surf music and power pop, when not conjuring images of a movie-theater organist experiencing a psychotic break. Ms. Weiss displayed great dexterity in matching Mr. Coomes's musical rantings while maintaining a more solid focus.
The couple are so well matched that their continued collaboration, despite their divorce in 1995, seems like a given. Mr. Coomes writes morbid lyrics about romantic and personal failure, but they never feel surly, partly because they contrast so perfectly with the band's aggressively sunny melodies. This mix of heaviness and fizz is Quasi's transcendent jest, enriching the comic impact of Mr. Coomes's dark reflections. Ms. Weiss clearly appreciates the joke; when Mr. Coomes reverses the old cliche by singing, ''You always hurt the one who loves you,'' he gave her a theatrical wink, and she returned a big smile.
Mr. Coomes and Ms. Weiss are in their early 30's, and their well-honed, caustic pop exemplifies the good-natured sarcasm of bohemians who have seen their fantasies tempered by the salt of reality. Creeper Lagoon, the night's San Francisco-based openers, still display the wide-eyed dreaminess of youth. Its meandering songs charmed with delicate open guitar tunings and ramshackle rhythms. While Quasi made the bitter stuff of imperfect life a confection, Creeper Lagoon stayed tuned to the natural beauty of the Ecotopian landscape, where small magic takes precedence over compromising ambition.
POP REVIEW
JAZZ FESTIVAL REVIEW
More typical was Minoru Miki's ''Marimba Spiritual,'' in which Wu Kuo-Hsuan's brilliant solo was backed by the clacking of woodblocks, the pounding of drums and the clanging of cymbals and chimes.
Idioms were similarly varied, with East and West freely mingled. Lai Deh-Ho's ''Ki-Go,'' named for a signature proclamation on cymbal and drum in Chinese opera, was especially charming in its confusion of cultures. Western march rhythms brushed up against Chinese sonorities, eventually yielding the unlikeliest of tunes, from ''The Bridge on the River Kwai.''
Wen Loong-Hsing's ''Tanazen'' (''To Listen From the Heart'') went so far as to inject into the clamor a soprano, singing a Chinese text in a Western style thick with vibrato. To a listener with no comprehension of the text, the effect, evidently meant to be touching, was merely odd.
Indeed, none of the music here was of deathless quality. The most captivating pieces were those that simply set out to have fun.
Lee Mingxiong's ''Tigers Rising and Dragons Leaping'' pulled all the stops to summon the atmosphere of a Chinese new year. An Zhi-Shun's ''Squabbling Ducks'' vividly evoked its heroes' waddling and quacking using only woodblocks and cymbals, with a basso duck finally ringing a peremptory end to the sqabbling.
Lien Ya-Wen's ''Percussion Lagoon'' was more predictable in its march through various types of ''instruments,'' including tuned stones. It and Wen Loong-Hsing's Folk Suite might have been salvaged by more persuasive performances.
True, apart from a few imperfect unisons and the occasional dropped stick, there was nothing actively wrong with these attempts, directed by Mr. Lien, who founded the group 12 years ago. But the Taipei Theater itself set the standard for percussion concerts this season with its presentation of the spectacular Ju Percussion Group, also from Taiwan, last August.
By comparison, Taipei Percussion lacked some of the personality and the last ounce of bravura technique needed to put across such eccentric music. Still, the existence of two such enterprising groups must make for interesting competition back home.
MUSIC REVIEW
The evening started out with Mr. Coltrane and his group performing  ''Tones for Jobe Kane,'' with Mr. Coltrane opening on tenor saxophone, unaccompanied and sounding startlingly original, his well-sanded and soft tone pushing together mounds of notes. The group -- Ralph Alessi on trumpet, Michael Cain on piano, Lonnie Plaxico on bass and Jeff Watts on drums -- joined in, and Mr. Watts propelled it all, sounding less like a jazz drummer than a set of percussionists.
After another tune, ''In Three for Thee,'' Ms. Coltrane, a pianist, and her son performed John Coltrane's ''Crescent,'' making it an extraordinarily emotional and effective duet. In part the emotion came from seeing a mother's obvious pride in a son who has become so accomplished, and in part because Mr. Coltrane played it with the same tone and rhythmic sense as his father would have done.
The younger Mr. Coltrane is a quiet original; in his own groups he sounds nothing like his father. And here he was, obviously having spent his time studying the music of his father, but yet arriving at his own originality anyway, a hero for being able to resist the inexorable pull of his father's genius.
Then Ms. Coltrane moved to the organ for a full-group version of John Coltrane's ''Love Supreme,'' with  Ravi Coltrane reverting to his own voice.
The second half offered a Reader's Digest version of a Ravi Shankar concert; it lasted an hour, and as Mr. Shankar joked, he often takes an hour just to tune his instrument. At first Mr. Shankar, a sitarist, accompanied by his daughter Anouska on sitar, seemed disgruntled. That wore off, and by the end of the short set the two Shankars had engaged in flurries of virtuosic call-and-response improvisation.
Mr. Shankar improvised lines and Ms. Shankar repeatedly responded with the same lovely melody. Then Mr. Shankar put down his sitar and Ms. Shankar, sounding utterly different from her father, improvised against tablas, using aggressive geometric ideas, ramming home her improvisations; the crowd cheered her loudly, and Mr. Shankar, beaming, was as proud as Ms. Coltrane had been of her son. In both cases the parent had passed down the right lessons about individuality and the power of improvisation; their offspring were no longer works in progress.  POP REVIEW
It's euphoric music for a while, and the audience loved the group. But midway through the show the songs blended into one. The arranging is repetitious, the sing-along tricks that the band uses to engage the audience slowed down the show, and there was a feeling of insincerity, as if music was meant solely for excitement and crowd participation.
Jane Bunnett, a Canadian saxophonist, had opened the show in the Main Space with her Cuban group, Spirits of Havana. Ms. Bunnett has spent the last decade figuring out a merging of jazz improvisation and Afro-Cuban traditional music, and on Friday the blend was raw and effective, part 20th century and from the New World, part ageless and African. She put Afro-Cuban choral parts against jazz riffs and slipped her soprano saxophone improvisations in between the pumping machinery of the percussion. It was both utterly relaxed and tightly coiled.
Ms. Bunnett had the Cuban percussion master Panache Quinto playing the lead drum in her ensemble, and he used the cajon, a wooden box, along with Bata drums, to open up spaces in the percussion. He's a minimalist, and he dropped three-note ideas in the storm of percussion. Suddenly, the sound cleared up, the spaces between his notes became tranquil. Then the chorus came in, with high, nasal notes. Ms. Bunnett or the Cuban pianist Hilario Duran improvised against the singers, bringing harmony to the chants, mixing worlds, and eras.
JAZZ FESTIVAL REVIEW
The JVC Jazz Festival has booked Joao Gilberto, the father of the bossa nova, for a sold-out concert tonight at Carnegie Hall; the reclusive, whispery singer, who rarely tours, is celebrating the 40th anniversary of his first bossa nova single. On Wednesday at Avery Fisher Hall, the JVC festival brings together the guitarists Joao Bosco, Egberto Gismonti and Toninho Horta, backed by first-rate Brazilian sidemen, as the Brazilian Jazz Ensemble.
And in between are concerts by two major singers -- Maria Bethania (at Carnegie Hall tomorrow) and Gal Costa (at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday) -- from the movement called tropicalismo, Brazil's major musical wave of the late 1960's and early 70's. Tropicalismo merged Brazilian traditions with the wild-eyed possibilities of rock and was spearheaded by songwriters who rank with the best musicians alive: Caetano Veloso (Ms. Bethania's brother) and Gilberto Gil.
Ms. Bethania and Ms. Costa are lifetime friends from Bahia, where they grew up with Mr. Veloso and Mr. Gil. When the two songwriters, who were already stars in Brazil, grew a little too inventive for the dictatorship that was running Brazil in the late 60's, both were imprisoned and then exiled to London. There, they soaked up English rock from the Beatles to Traffic to Pink Floyd. Meanwhile, they were sending songs back home, where Ms. Costa and Ms. Bethania would perform and record them.
Ms. Bethania is revered in Brazil, but has not performed in New York  City since 1988; her deep contralto voice gives her songs a pensive dignity. Ms. Costa's show at Avery Fisher Hall looks back to the early days of tropicalismo, following up on an album, ''Acustico'' (''Unplugged''), that she recorded in a concert for MTV Brasil. On it, she revives some of the songs from the early days of tropicalismo; in concert, as on the album, she will be backed by a small band playing acoustic instruments.
''It is such beautiful and rich material,'' she said. ''And the way that I sing is very different 30 years later. The feeling is much deeper.''
Ms. Costa is one of the world's most graceful singers, with a voice that brings tender understanding to every line. ''To be a good singer, you must always think about the words and what the words say,'' she said. ''I must identify with the song and find something in common with the lyrics of the song. I try to feel every word.''
Meanwhile, Central Park Summerstage has chosen this week for its own Brazilian music festival, which started on Wednesday. Tonight, the percussionist Cyro Baptista leads his group, Beat the Donkey, a band of percussionists who merge carnival traditions with modern friskiness. Sharing the bill is Dance Brazil, performing a work about what gold mining did to the people of the Amazonas region; the score is by Mr. Veloso.
Brazil now has its own wave of funk, which sounds less exotic to American ears, but tomorrow afternoon, one of Brazil's top funk bandleaders, Ed Motta, performs alongside one of his models, the vibraphonist Roy Ayers, whose brand of funk was rediscovered in the 90's by acid-jazz fans.
Sunday afternoon belongs to O Rappa, a Brazilian hip-hop group, and Karnak, a group that throws everything from Tuvan throat singing to heavy-metal guitar chords to a symphony orchestra into its mix, turning it into a polyglot samba party. Whether the group is toying with juju guitars from Nigeria or segueing a mock-Russian anthem into a samba, it maintains the light touch and buoyant humor that runs through Brazilian music.
''We don't have preconceptions about any kind of music,'' said Andre Abujamra, Karnak's founder. ''Bad music, good music, strange music, we put them all together in a mixer. But we don't look like a Frankenstein monster. It's all Karnak.''
Mr. Abujamra traces Karnak's music to the diversity of his city, Sao Paulo. ''For those of us who were born in Sao Paulo, the mixing of the music and of the culture is in our blood. I didn't have to do research, because my head is already a mix of all the music and traditions and religions of the world.
''We are not world music. We are just born into the chaos.''
Where to Hear the Sounds of Brazil
Here is information about places to hear Brazilian music this weekend and next week. Information for the JVC Jazz Festival New York: (212) 501-1390; for Summerstage: (212) 360-2777 or the Web site: www.summerstage.org.
AVERY FISHER HALL. ''Gal Costa and Friends,'' Tuesday at 8 P.M. Brazilian Jazz Ensemble, with Joao Bosco, Egberto Gismonti, Hermeto Pascoal, Toninho Horta, Helio Delmiro; Wednesday at 8 P.M. Both are part of the JVC Jazz Festival New York; tickets, $20 to $55.
CAFE WHA?, 115 Macdougal Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 254-3706. Vanessa Falabella and Friends. Brazilian Night, every Monday at 9:30 P.M.; cover, $10 plus one-drink minimum.
CARNEGIE HALL. ''Joao Gilberto: 40 Years of Bossa Nova,'' tonight at 8; sold out. ''Maria Bethania and Band,'' tomorrow at 8 P.M. Both are part of the JVC Jazz Festival New York; tickets, $20 to $55.
S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, SoHo, (212) 243-4940. Samba Novo, tomorrow at 9 and 11 P.M. and 1 A.M.; cover, $17; minimum, $15.
SUMMERSTAGE, Central Park, Rumsey Playfield, midpark, reachable from the entrance at Fifth Avenue and 72d Street. Dance Brazil, and Cyro Baptista and Beat the Donkey, tonight at 7; Ed Motta, tomorrow at 3 P.M.; O Rappa and Karnak, Sunday at 3 P.M. Free.
ZINC BAR, 90 West Houston Street, at La Guardia Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 477-8337. Cidinho Texeira, Brazilian Showfest. Sunday at 11 P.M. and 12:30 and 2 A.M. Admission, $5.
Richard Goode's piano recital is one of the highlights. Mr. Goode himself is a nice paradigm for connections like the one between art and academe: in fact, he says, a bewildered agent once asked him: ''Are you a scholar with a touch of the poet? Are you a classical pianist with a romantic side? Who are you?''
His centrist program, like everything else he plays, is vintage Goode: Mozart, Beethoven, Schumann (the rip-roaring Opus 17 fantasy) and Chopin. Chopin is a fairly new composer for Mr. Goode, who only in the past couple of years has extended his powerful attention from the Teutonic heartland to the Polish dances and filigree world of the fragile expatriate.
''I found myself neglecting Chopin in particular,'' he said. ''There's a general feeling around that there's a special thing called a Chopin player. People rarely play Beethoven and Chopin both well. I took a year off from concerts and immersed myself in Chopin, as I had in Beethoven. It's equivalent to learning a language. It educates you to a different way of playing piano; you have the feeling of a man speaking to you.''
Another pianist, Anne-Marie McDermott, returns, this year with her sisters in the McDermott Trio. She is musical daughter No. 3 in her family: Kerry, No. 2 by a year, is a violinist with the New York Philharmonic, and Maureen, ahead by another year, is a member of Cello, an unusual quartet of cellists.
What Ms. McDermott calls their ''artistic temperament'' came from their mother, who died when the girls were teen-agers and their brother younger. ''Mom didn't play piano,'' she recalled. ''Her fingernails were out to here.'' The sisters, who appeared in the 1980 movie ''Fame,'' are to perform trios by Mozart, Borodin and Mendelssohn.
On Fourth of July, Summerfest fires up with an all-American potpourri of orchestral music from the film ''To Kill a Mockingbird''; Barber's Adagio, memorable in the score of ''Platoon,'' and the ''Catfish Row'' Suite from Gershwin's ''Porgy and Bess.'' (It's a safe bet the program notes will mention the Gershwin centenary.) The Rutgers Summerfest Orchestra, led by Richard Auldon Clark, will be beefed up, in the style of an academic festival, by professionals from Manhattan.
While most events take place at Mason Gross School, some, for the first time, will be part of an exchange program with the Newark and Camden divisions, involving all three campuses in the Summerfest, as well as other locations in Newark.
The Newark division is sending jazz. Its Faculty Jazz Ensemble, with soloists from both the Newark and the New Brunswick campuses, will be at Mason Gross for the first time, announcing selections from the stage. So will the quintet known as Hasidic New Wave, composed of members of the combined jazz faculties, in a program of jazz, from downtown through Eastern European styles. (The group's CD is ''Jews and the Abstract Truth.'')
Julianne Baird, a soprano who specializes in interpretations of early music, will come to New Brunswick from the Camden campus with a program called ''Music From Jane Austen's Notebooks.'' She will be accompanied at the fortepiano by Andrew Willis, her frequent partner. Their most recent recording is ''The Jane Austen Song Books,'' on Vox Classics.
Marilyn Somville, dean of Mason Gross and artistic director of Summerfest, is to read passages from Austen novels. ''She gives insights into the culture and class system,'' Ms. Somville said. ''For example, she writes about training young women in the arts as a way to organize family life and entertainment. In certain circles, though, she shouldn't be too good because it implied that she was a paid professional of a lower class.''
The recital's big fortepiano solo is ''The Battle of Prague,'' by Frantisek Koczwara. Forgotten now but well known in the early 19th century, it suggests sounds and implications of battle, as well as illustrating performance practice of the era. ''Anyone who knows Austen will pick up the threads quickly and know exactly where we are in each novel,'' Ms. Somville said.
Austen lived in England after the time of Bach and Telemann, so her continental contemporaries were performing their music, as will the Summerfest Cantata Singers and an orchestra of period instruments. Frederick Urrey, a professor of music at Rutgers, is the tenor soloist, with his wife, Taina Kataja-Urrey, a Finnish-born soprano.
Mr. Urrey's recitals at Rutgers are sometimes workshops for his engagements around the country, where he sings mostly the oratorio and song repertory. He once commented that his campus concerts were for choosing works he's ''ready to attempt.''
English and French Baroque dance, in period costume, will be presented by Apollo's Banquet. Its performance versions are based on academic study of original choreography and music scores.
RUTGERS SUMMERFEST
Nicholas Music Center, Douglass College, George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick, and locations in Newark and Camden
Rutgers Summerfest Orchestra with Camellia Johnson, soprano, in a concert of American music. Saturday at 8 P.M. Apollo's Banquet, Baroque music and dance. Next Sunday at 8 P.M. American Wind Quintet. July 7 at 8 P.M. Hasidic New Wave, featuring Greg Wall, saxophonist. July 8 at 8 P.M. Barbara Dever, mezzo-soprano. July 9 at 8 P.M. Miami String Quartet. July 10 at 8 P.M. Rutgers Summerfest Orchestra in music of Vaughan Williams, Mahler and Brahms. July 11 at 8 P.M. McDermott Trio. July 12 at 2 P.M. Summerfest Cantata Singers and Orchestra in music of Telemann and Bach. July 12 at 8 P.M. Dorian Piano Trio. July 14 at 8 P.M. Julianne Baird, soprano. July 15 at 8 P.M. Newman and Oltman Guitar Duo. July 16 at 8 P.M. Tokyo String Quartet. July 17 at 8 P.M. Rutgers Summerfest Orchestra in music of Mendelssohn, Dvorak and David Amram. July 18 at 8 P.M. Newark Faculty Jazz Ensemble with Ralph Bowen, saxophonist. July 19 at 2 P.M. Amabile String Quartet. July 21 at 8 P.M. Rachel Barton, violinist. July 22 at 8 P.M. Richard Goode, pianist. July 23 at 8 P.M. Anonymous 4. July 24 at 8 P.M. Rutgers Summerfest Orchestra in music of Grieg, by Mendelssohn and Prokofiev. July 25 at 8 P.M.
(732) 932-7511
MUSIC
The arrangements (by Sammy Nestico, who worked with Count Basie in the 1960's and 70's, and John Clayton Jr., who works with Quincy Jones) followed big-band conventions: trumpets and saxophones tossing phrases back and forth, trombones for mellowness and muscle, a pause for a drum flourish before the big final phrase. Mr. Collins socked out the beat and underlined interjections with splashy cymbals.
He isn't joining the current wave of swing revivalists, who thrive on anachronism and irony. He approached the music straightforwardly, recreating past approaches through respect for their craftsmanship. The band played standards without a hint of iconoclasm; the most daring arrangement introduced a little dissonance into Miles Davis's ''Milestones.'' Bent into swing rhythms, Mr. Collins's pop songs weren't far removed from typical swing fare, with short melody lines working like riffs. ''Invisible Touch'' became a homage to the 50's Basie band, with a tersely plinked piano introduction, laid-back band chords and a burst of brass.
Gerald Albright, a guest soloist on alto saxophone, played proficient, glib approximations of predecessors like Hank Crawford, Junior Walker and David Sanborn in Mr. Collins's ''Against All Odds'' and a showpiece version of ''Georgia on My Mind.'' Oleta Adams, who sang a miniset of standards, attached Sarah Vaughan's low-register breathiness and octave-hopping lines to Ella Fitzgerald's high curlicues.
In accepting the 1950's and 60's styles, Mr. Collins willfully ignored their latter-day connotations and retroactive corniness; the pomp of ''Los Endos,'' for instance, started to sound like an awards-show fanfare. When he finally got around to singing ''The Way You Look Tonight'' and ''Do Nothing Till You Hear From Me,'' the reticence that serves him so well against dramatic rock backdrops simply sounded noncommittal. And for all the dexterity of the music, the concert seemed to sum up the moment when a middle-aged man realizes he hasn't escaped turning out like his parents.
POP REVIEW
The Center for Contemporary Opera revived ''Postman'' at the Kaye Theater for two performances this week. The piece, with a libretto by Colin Graham, originated at the  Opera Theater of St. Louis in 1982, then traveled to a number of cities but, until now, never to New York. In opera we are always asking the question ''words or music?,'' and here we must ask it again.
In Mr. Paulus's case, there is a certain symbiosis at work. Here, music is not a freestanding art but thrives instead as a support and catalyst for the narrative onstage. The score is less an engine of originality than a receptacle, recycling ballad-like lyricism, polytonality and other mild dissonance to fit the mood or gesture required. ''Postman'' in the pit is traditionally symphonic with the embellishments of saxophone, guitar and mallet percussion needed to satisfy its American setting. When  the narrative beckons, the music aims to please.
''Postman,'' workmanlike and professional as it is, needs Cain's novel a lot more than Cain's novel needs it.  The story, indeed, gives the music a reason for being when I doubt that the music could survive very long on its own. ''Postman'' is in any case strong operatic material: an unhappy marriage, the drifter as lover, murder for insurance money and finally the hangman.
In the opening scenes, Mr. Paulus's music tells the story well, with terse interchange and a nice evocation of underlying tension. Much of the later music sinks into bogs of explanatory monologue and uninspired chantlike lines; it depends upon Cain's narration to see it through.
Indeed, one had to ask at the end of these two and a half hours on Tuesday night what the purpose of this opera really is. Is it to enhance a novel that works without the help of music, or is it to provide the gift of life to operatic music that can't very well breathe on its own and relies on the slam-bang violence of Cain's storytelling? Mr. Paulus is overmatched, but he manages to bring down Cain with him.
This production, staged by Charles Maryan and conducted by Richard Marshall, helps. It is neat and well-mannered, possessing an opera-house civility that refuses to break through to the violence and furies of Cain's characters. In the part of Cora, Joy Hermalyn's bright, hard soprano comes closest to what is missing. Richard Kosowski has a pleasant tenor but seems insulated from the seediness of Nick the Greek; his diction is also muddy in the places where it needs to be clear.
As Frank, Shon Sims sings with a cultured baritone and cuts a nice figure onstage. Musically he is the best thing in the opera, although his taciturn, deadpan demeanor is not exactly the torn, passionate and confused Frank Chambers of Cain's novel. Mr. Sims's blandness reinforces  the opera's emasculating powers where storytelling is concerned. Keith Howard, as Sackett, the district attorney, gives ''Postman'' some life, but the operatic process has already scraped too much of Cain's enlivening dirt away.
Mr. Marshall conducted a decent though not always confident pit orchestra. Mr. Maryan's sliding sets were simple and effective. The other players were Blaine Hendsbee, James Hay and Bill Sinclair.
MUSIC REVIEW
What it does not take much into account are the special circumstances of outdoor performance. Even if the amplification had been working properly, Ives's very quiet, very misty ''Central Park in the Dark'' would have been a strange piece with which to begin the concert. Being a portrait of reveries and interruptions (as if from a ragtime band heard across the evening), it has all its evocative power negated when it is placed back in the situation it describes, with the further hindrance of a century's advance in mechanical noise.
Stefan Wolpe's Chamber Piece No. 2 proved lively enough to make an impression under trying circumstances. Samuel Barber's ''Knoxville, Summer of 1915,'' sung by Johanna Wiseman, did not. Edgard Varese's ''Octandre'' was the only piece on the program that really suited the occasion: scored for wind instruments with supporting double bass, its blasts, alarm calls and sad melodies sounded well through the night, though the players could have been more favorably positioned and lighted.
Varese's chief New York pupil, Mr. Chou, was represented by a strikingly scored arrangement of an ancient Chinese melody, ''Yu Ko,'' and the concert ended with ''Arachnophobia,'' an exuberant and skillful joke piece by Mr. Bunch, featuring spidery sounds from contrabassoon, cocktail music (in which Yosuke Kawasaki relished his schmaltzy violin cadenzas) and a jew's-harp solo from Mr. Sachs.
MUSIC REVIEW
To hear the men sing, women ruled their world. Mr. Sledge and Mr. Chandler reached the peaks of their sets on their knees, and the other male singers sang about the loneliness and misery of unrequited love. Ms. Thomas had some sass for lying men, with a stretch of comedy in ''Wish Someone Would Care,'' and she deflated male pride as she sang, ''You can have my husband but please don't mess with my man.'' But in ''It's Raining,'' her coyly syncopated phrasing and the shifting tone of her voice traced a precise arc from affected nonchalance to desolation.
The singers, all in their 50's and 60's, revealed voices that had changed but not disappeared. Mr. Sledge sounded the gentlest, and the most telling. As a songwriter, he specializes in utterly abject love songs, testifying to men's helplessness in the face of desire. His voice has hollowed out since the 1960's, leaving him with a high tenor that is vivid and ardent but almost wraithlike in its pained delicacy. For ''Let Me Wrap You in My Warm and Tender Love,'' he brought his wife, Rosa, on stage for a duet that they sang in each other's arms. And in ''When a Man Loves a Woman,'' which he sang with a humility that was a polar opposite to Michael Bolton's heavy-breathing bluster, Mr. Sledge knelt and crooned Rosa's name.
Mr. Jackson has unleashed his baritone since he made his big hits in the early 1960's like ''Any Day Now''; he started phrases with a gospel attack and worked his way up to big sustained notes with an operatic vibrato that suggested Mario Lanza. Mr. Chandler, suffering from laryngitis, made up for a temporarily iffy middle register with syncopated timing, flamboyant gestures -- he wielded a top hat, a cane and a cape for ''Duke of Earl'' -- and a pure, startling falsetto that was miraculously untouched by his illness.
Ben E. King chose to toy with songs like ''There Goes My Baby'' and ''Stand by Me,'' letting his phrasing glance off the beat with a jazz singer's playfulness and barely dipping from his light tenor register to the baritone he has in reserve.
Mr. Butler, always a gruff singer, now had extra huskiness in ''Only the Strong Survive'' and ''Your Precious Love,'' but he used it to push phrases like a preacher. And Mr. Price sounded as jaunty as he did nearly 40 years ago, praising a girl's ''Personality'' or detailing the gunplay in ''Stagger Lee.'' The band, which was stiff and tinny for much of the show, found some gusto for the New Orleans rhythms.
As each singer commanded the stage, it was obvious where current rhythm-and-blues singers learned how to woo audiences. And when the soul veterans sang about decades-old romances with undimmed ardor and indelible voices, it was easy to push aside grim thoughts about the way the music business discards aging performers and to savor not just the passion, but the perserverance.
POP REVIEW
Yet for all its spaciness, Tricky's music is grounded in the particular testimony of a young black man whose dreams are often thwarted and whose rage and hunger consume him. Although he is British, Tricky's fascinations connect him to mysterious American protagonists who embody society's shifting racial tensions: Robert Johnson, Ralph Ellison's fictional Invisible Man, hip-hop's martyr and antihero Tupac Shakur.
Tricky's understanding of this complicated position is increasing along with his musical skills. His latest album, ''Angels With Dirty Faces'' (Island), is extremely varied, ranging from speedy hard-core techno to lush ambient grooves. Live, Tricky highlighted his aggressive side: his once-raspy voice has strengthened considerably, and he rearranged old songs like ''Suffocated Love'' and new ones like ''Lyrics of Fury'' as spirited rants.
The catalyst for this tumult was Tricky's drummer, Perry Melius. Although Tricky's albums remain diffuse and contemplative, under Mr. Melius's sway his shows have become funkfests, twisting the legacy of James Brown and George Clinton to include electronic beats and samples. Tricky's rapping often seemed like a sparring match with Mr. Melius; he would unleash a phrase, then recoil, dealt a stunning blow by the drummer's snare. His more sinuous melodies were relayed by two vocalists, Carmen Ejogo and Denise Ellington. Tricky's usual partner, Martina Topley-Bird, is sitting out this tour to care for their toddler daughter. Her substitutes never quite matched her hypnotic abilities, but both traversed the range of the music's mutating emotions.
Ultimately, though, this was Tricky's psychodrama, and its highlight came with ''Carriage for Two,'' a new song about his daughter. As Ms. Ejogo languidly intoned lyrics from ''God Bless the Child'' and the band built a groove as cool and irrevocable as fate, Tricky shouted out words of pride and hope, his voice tinged with desperation. ''Your father's rich,'' he muttered, bending a phrase from ''Porgy and Bess,'' another story of the soul's wrestling match with oppression. The nod indicated which struggle Tricky sees his art engaging, and his fury showed he's more determined than ever to win.
POP REVIEW
Her show, which runs through Aug. 1, is devoted entirely to the music of her father, whom she refers to throughout the performance as ''Dad.''
Ms. Mancini, who is accompanied by a group that includes Mike Renzi on piano, and her husband, Gregg Field, on drums, can certainly sing. A formal pop stylist who delivers carefully measured readings of songs, she rarely strays from the written note.
In her timbre, she suggests a more laid-back descendant of the 1950's pop belter Toni Arden, who specialized in declamatory semioperatic ballads.
Like Ms. Arden, Ms. Mancini conveys guarded tension, even when her voice spreads into a rapid vibrato that suggests the glamorous vocal equivalent of diamonds flashing.
Tuesday's show opened with a jazzy, uptempo ''Charade,'' followed by ''Two for the Road,'' and reached a lush plateau with ''Dreamsville.'' Later, Ms. Mancini swung out confidently with ''Le Jazz Hot.'' Her readings of ''Moon River,'' ''Dear Heart'' and ''Days of Wine and Roses,'' folksy pop ballads with a deeply nostalgic undertone, held emotion at arm's length.
As a performer celebrating a family tie, Ms. Mancini remained surprisingly reserved.
Instead of an intimate portrait of a father and daughter's shared musical values, the show had the atmosphere of a carefully prepared recital.
CABARET REVIEW
The thread Mr. Patinkin uses to connect a dozen or so Yiddish songs is Paul Simon's austere 1973 ballad ''American Tune,'' a morose folk-pop hymn that when it first appeared was read by many as a sad-hearted lament for the decline of American idealism in the age of Watergate. Here, Mr. Patinkin recognizes it as a song about the immigrant experience, breaking it into fragments that become chapter headings in a program that includes a playful children's alphabet song, ''Oyfn Pripetshik,'' and a searing Holocaust song, ''Unter Dayne Vayse Shtern.'' As deconstructed by Mr. Patinkin, ''American Tune'' becomes a surreal reflection in which he travels through time and has a series of visionary flashes that suggest the images and colors of a Chagall painting.
Other familiar standards woven into the program and sung sometimes in English, sometimes in Yiddish, sometimes in both, include Irving Berlin's ''God Bless America'' (performed while a giant American flag unfurls at the back of the stage) and ''White Christmas'' (delightfully re-interpreted as a dizzy skipping instrumental duet by Eric Stern on piano and Saeka Matsuyama on violin), and Leonard Bernstein and Stephen Sondheim's ''Maria'' (''Mayn Mirl''), from ''West Side Story.''
''Take Me Out to the Ball Game,'' composed in 1908 by Jack Norworth and Albert Von Tilzer, is offered as a proto-melting pot celebration in which America is a great big happy American family munching peanuts and Cracker Jack at a baseball game. In the hourlong show's corniest moment, Mr. Patinkin coaxes the audience into standing up and dancing the hokey pokey.
Throughout, the singer, dressed in black, brings his characteristic ferocity to the material, turning it into a sustained drama of his spiritual and esthetic quest for roots. Some of the Yiddish songs, like ''Motl der Opreyter,'' the story of a tailor working in a sweatshop who is killed in a union strike, are wrenching. Mr. Patinkin dramatizes everything in a sharply etched vocabulary of hand gestures that range from the explanatory to the fist-shaking. His voice can dip from a reedy, brittle falsetto filled with a childlike wonder and longing, into a deep feral growl.
There are no emotional halfways. You feel the agony, anxiety and joy that fueled Jewish immigration from Eastern Europe to America. Just as powerfully, the show conveys an abiding nostalgia for the language and culture left behind.
''Mamaloshen'' runs through Aug. 22 at the Angel Orensanz Foundation and Center for the Arts, at 172 Norfolk Street, on the Lower East Side.
MUSIC REVIEW
Later generations of jazz musicians have grown used to tossing out more lines to the audience; they casually turn a tune inside out and display the seams, pair off musicians for sudden interludes and cause breakdowns and dropouts in the music. Mr. Hutcherson began in the early 60's, and follows a different esthetic mandate: jazz that is thick and fortressed.
Soloing, Mr. Hutcherson danced before his vibraphone, cruising through long runs and topping them off with blues phrases. And the dry sound of his marimba, ringing less and thus competing less in the traffic of sound against Ms. Allen's dire, pedaled chords, sounded even better.
But it was Mr. Garrett who seized a missing element: concision. He left gaps in his lines, curling brusque notes over on themselves and bringing focus to a fog-bound music. Mr. Foster followed suit, imitating the rhythmic thesis of each idea to come from Mr. Garrett's horn.
JAZZ REVIEW
The band played nothing but old hits: ''777-9311,'' ''She's Mine,'' the slow-jam ''Gigolos Get Lonely Too.'' And after that last, Jerome took the microphone, while Mr. Day attended to his sideburns with a tiny comb. ''I want to tell you about myself,'' Jerome said, and talked about his clothes. He started on ''the ground floor,'' pointing to his two-toned Stacy-Adams wingtips, then moved up to mezzanine (three-pleat down to the knee) and the second floor (a long canary-yellow wool-crepe sports coat).
''Just to sum up the whole ensemble, my brother,'' Mr. Day queried, suddenly interested, ''what would you call it?''
''A pimp suit,'' Jerome said, proudly.
''You know, that brought a tear to my eye when you said 'pimp,' '' Mr. Day said.
The Ohio Players, now in their 30th year of performing, center on their lead guitarist and singer, Leroy (Sugar) Bonner. Mr. Bonner is one of those wandering-attention frontmen, like Sly Stone and George Clinton, who make themselves both essential and expendable. He played finger-picked guitar lines as casual ornament, and a lot of his singing consisted of phrases like ''wah, wah, wah'' over falsetto choruses chanted by three band members.
Where the Time hits an audience all at once with its full weight, the Ohio Players have always worked a bit more slowly and mysteriously. The songs Mr. Bonner wrote for the band, like ''Rollercoaster'' and ''I Want to Be Free,'' string together series of mesmerizing riffs, and they sounded as taut as ever, connected by the clattering, falling-downstairs drum fills of James (Diamond) Williams and scratched rhythm-guitar lines of Clarence Willis, two other original members. But it was a too casual re-enactment of old times, and the early finish prevented the band from working up to its natural peak.
POP REVIEW
Savage Garden actually surpasses  Top 40 banality with its playful mainstream confections. Daniel Jones, a multi-instrumentalist who writes the music, lifts moods from sources like Culture Club and Michael Jackson without making obvious references, so his tunes are fresh but recognizable. His hummable melodies are driven by cosmopolitan dance beats; at the Beacon, disco balls and colored lights were visual cues for the party rhythms the group tapped, from calypso to techno. Though backed by a full band, Savage Garden got its energy from musical styles that sound just as good when prerecorded.
The fact that this group played live, however, illustrated a difference between it and those other artists benefiting from the current bubble gum revival. Mr. Hayes and Mr. Jones, who both did time in Australian bar bands, actually make their own music and concoct their own image. Amid all the glitz and camp of their show, which ranged from jokes about the Spice Girls to the requisite moment when Mr. Hayes dropped to his knees and sang to a fan, Savage Garden remained casual and in control. They clearly enjoyed their shtick for what it was: a rendering of broad emotions in palatable terms.
Mr. Hayes paid tribute to other self-aware divas by performing ''I Can't Make You Love Me,'' once a hit for Bonnie Raitt, and ''One of Us,'' made famous by Joan Osborne. He slipped in a snippet of Madonna's ''Ray of Light'' before performing his own ballad ''Santa Monica,'' and the group's backup singers quoted ''Free Your Mind,'' by En Vogue, as an introduction to the bouncy ''I Want You.''
Mr. Hayes has no fear of his feminine side, as his choice of covers made clear; singing Savage Garden's best-selling ''Truly Madly Deeply,'' which closed the show, he sounded as much like Shania Twain as he did George Michael. His stance suggested that under the sway of pop sentiment, such small differences as male versus female don't apply. Everyone becomes an angel in this prefabricated heaven.
POP REVIEW
While Ms. Hatfield's narratives are turbulent, her tunes are meticulous. Some follow ordinary verse-chorus-verse structures; others move from section to contrasting section, diagraming her mood swings in shifts from minor to major, firm downbeats to restless syncopation, terse melody lines to open-ended, repeating questions like ''What makes baby get so high?''
Ms. Hatfield was playing skeletal versions of her songs, which she records and usually performs with a full band, and will tour with it in the fall. But she's no simple strummer; her guitar parts were strategic, retaining the instrumental hooks and sketching the changing textures of her band arrangements. In their transparency, the songs sounded almost frail, but that was an illusion; Ms. Hatfield's sweetness is also steely and unflinching.
POP REVIEW
At Tramps, there were some flashes of the playing and singing that got Mr. Green a job as Eric Clapton's replacement in John Mayall's Bluesbreakers in 1966. ''Supernatural,'' a minor-key blues instrumental he recorded with the Bluesbreakers, was all lean, wiry phrases; ''Albatross,'' a Fleetwood Mac instrumental, was serene and reflective. Mr. Green sang ''The Green Manalishi'' and played its quivering guitar chords with knowing ease. But for much of the set, Mr. Green sounded out of practice, with his small voice wandering off the beat and his guitar solos losing their narrative concentration. The sense of menace he once brought to songs like ''Rattlesnake Shake'' was revived only by Roger Cotton on keyboards, jabbing chords from a Hammond organ against Splinter Group's jaunty beat.
Mr. Simmonds's current version of Savoy Brown is a dependable blues trio that worked its way through styles from the Mississippi Delta to Chicago. Where the Savoy Brown of the 1970's sometimes fell into monotony, the current one offers both variety and dynamics. With Mr. Simmonds or the group's American bassist, introduced only as Nathaniel, on lead vocals, each song featured a different time-tested arrangement and a distinct approach to lead guitar: terse and stinging on Fenton Robinson's ''Mississippi Steamboat,'' unhurried and tinged with country in ''Train to Nowhere,'' and harking back to Elmore James with a slide-guitar instrumental. ''Street Corner Talking,'' with bass and guitar in unison, hinted at the blues-rock origins of Black Sabbath; ''Stay While the Night Is Young,'' with wah-wah articulating each note, verged on a psychedelic jam but stayed within the blues framework. After all these years, Mr. Simmonds isn't about to leave his chosen genre.
POP REVIEW
The portrait of electronic music presented by ''Modulations'' focuses more on its pop manifestations than on its ''classical'' side, although the composers Karlheinz Stockhausen (who observes that there is ''no absolute silence in the world'') and John Cage are heard from. As the movie winds its circuitous way through a jungle of beats, clicks, buzzes, whooshes and scratches, it offers an informal but densely packed technological history of electronic sounds and styles.
The techniques of cutting and pasting sounds that are now done digitally predate the digital age. The producer Teo Macero, who worked extensively with Miles Davis, remembers assembling and editing sounds in the studio by laboriously snipping and reattaching fragments of audio tape.
Robert Moog, who invented one of the most popular synthesizers, discusses the dual uses of the instrument as an imitator of acoustic instruments and as a generator of brand-new sounds. He says he never intended the synthesizers to be used as an orchestral substitute.
Due respect is paid to Giorgio Moroder, the disco producer whose groundbreaking hit for Donna Summer, ''I Feel Love,'' was almost entirely electronic, except for the voice and a bass drum. The German group Kraftwerk is also frequently mentioned as having paved the way for electronic dance music with its hugely influential 1977 album ''Trans-Europe Express.'' The evolution of more recent electronically oriented dance styles, like ''house'' and its derivatives, is remembered by the producers and disk jockeys in Chicago, Detroit and London who invented and promoted them. We learn, among other things, how the sound known as ''acid house'' evolved from a piece of outdated equipment that produced a particular sound effect, a spiraling buzz, that came to define the style.
Others talk about the intimate relationship between drugs and electronics in nightclub dance music, and the systematic disorientation that various combinations of drugs and sounds can induce. One observer says that an ominous, despairing, subgenre of dance music was developed to express the negative feelings experienced by a group of clubgoers who were long-term abusers of the drug Ecstasy.
And what is the optimum pulse for keeping the patrons of a dance club on their feet all night long? ''Modulations'' tells us it is 133 beats a minute. Anything faster tends to exhaust people.
As informative as it is, ''Modulations'' isn't terribly well organized. And when it tries to find trippy visual equivalents for the weird sounds and beats, it comes up short. Still, despite its shortcomings, ''Modulations'' is an invaluable primer that begins to make sense of a rapidly changing sonic world that in many people's minds is only a grating, intimidating jumble of unwelcome noise.
MODULATIONS
Directed by Iara Lee; written by Peter Shapiro; directors of photography, Marcus Burnett and Paul Yates; edited by Paula Heredia; produced by George Gund; released by Strand Releasing. At the Quad Cinema, 34 West 34th Street, Greenwich Village. Running time: 73 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Afrika Bambaataa, Juan Atkins, Bundy Brown, DJ Spooky, Future Sound of London, Fumiya Tanaka, Hardfloor, Kodwo Eshun, Teo Macero, Christian Marclay, Giorgio Moroder, Robert Moog, Mixmaster Morris, Orbital, Prodigy, Simon Reynolds, Ed Rush, Karlheinz Stockhausen, Tetsu Inoue and Westbam.
FILM REVIEW
All his body language communicated that Mr. Vedder was walking a tightrope between showman and private man. The members of the band, which now includes the drummer Matt Cameron, formerly of Soundgarden, barely look like rock stars anymore; the guitarist Stone Gossard's bleached hair was the only indication that these weren't just men with ordinary jobs. And Mr. Vedder shied away from the messianic side of arena rock: he wasn't there to preach messages or whip up the crowd's emotions. ''I'm through with screaming and echoes that nobody hears,'' he sang in a new song, ''Faithful.'' When he put his head down and danced in place close to his microphone, or concentrated grinningly on Mr. Gossard's expansive, Hendrix-like solos, they seemed merely interior reactions.
The band played a handful of its hits with what seemed much more than a sense of duty: ''Alive,'' ''Even Flow'' and ''Better Man.'' But the night's best moments were more experimental, and only for the music's sake: instrumental side trips in the middle of songs where the drive dropped low and the band free-associated with grooves and lyrics and ringing, lingering guitar tones. As a device, it recalls Sonic Youth, another seasoned rock band steadying itself gracefully; tellingly, during one of these side trips in ''Daughter,'' Mr. Vedder quoted a line from the Sonic Youth song ''Androgynous Mind'' as well as making a passing reference to Bruce Springsteen's ''Jersey Girl.'' Many of the songs just shuffled to a close, dissipating the energy but retaining tension with a strange sense of calm.
Toward the end, Mr. Vedder engaged in the obligatory rock star ritual: he walked around the back of the stage to acknowledge 360 degrees of fan worship. But rather than wave or gesture at them, he just gazed, like someone who doesn't want to overexcite a nervous animal. And as a parting shot, the band played its most oblique and pretty song: ''Yellow Ledbetter,'' whose probably meaningless lyrics have been constantly revised according to time and temperament. Accompanying Mr. Gossard's delicate filigree, Mr. Vedder sang at his strongest and most undecipherable; it was the most graceful of exits, like a slow deflation of a balloon.
POP REVIEW
Any recording featuring the Dutch cellist Anner Bylsma recommends itself, but Mr. Bylsma's latest CD, with music by Jean-Pierre Duport, Bernhard Romberg, Beethoven and Boccherini, proves unusually attractive. In addition to standard cello-and-keyboard fare, it includes works for two cellos, with Kenneth Slowik as Mr. Bylsma's adept counterpart. (Both artists use 17th-century instruments). Stanley Hoogland is the fleet-fingered fortepianist.
Although the three Duport works (a sonata and two exercises) are primarily vehicles for technical display, there is music in these strains. Still, listeners may be more intrigued by Boccherini's E flat Sonata for Two Cellos, a meandering but engaging work, in which Mr. Bylsma and Mr. Slowik fuse their rich, sinewy tones.
Beethoven's cello variations (on Handel's ''See the Conqu'ring Hero Comes'' and Mozart's ''Bei Mannern'') are much documented on disk, so their presence here may summon less interest. Yet Mr. Bylsma and Mr. Hoogland play them with disarming freshness.
This CD's real prize, however, is Romberg's First Cello Sonata, a pithy, tuneful work reminiscent of Mozart and Beethoven. The disk's title, a reference to King Friedrich Wilhelm II of Prussia, who ruled from 1786 to 1797, is a bit misleading, for not all these works were composed at his court.
DAVID MERMELSTEIN
Then his first album, ''Can-I-Bus''  (Universal), was released to decidedly mixed reviews. The album grabbed the No. 2 spot on the Billboard charts, but even as Canibus modeled fine threads in a Rolling Stone magazine fashion spread, hip-hop loyalists began to whisper that his potential might be showing its limits. ''Can-I-Bus'' does lack something, although not brilliant rhymes or fascinating subject matter. What's missing is the music. Not only are the album's beats and samples less than captivating, the rapper himself undervalues the need for his words to sing as well as signify.
The same problem plagued him at Tramps on Thursday night. In a raspy snarl, Canibus spat out a few raps from his new album and a bit of free-style flow. He was assisted by the staccato-voiced rapper Divine, as well as Panama P.I., whose baritone recalled a hip-hop Louis Armstrong. They traded lines, and unsurprisingly Canibus had the best. ''My brain is I.B.M.-compatible,'' he said, and ''I slay the princess and live happily ever after with the dragon.''
Yet with the DJ, Flamboyant, delivering only adequate backing, Canibus never captured the flow necessary for a stellar rap performance. His rhythmic sense was grounded in impatience; his eagerness to get out the next brilliant rejoinder prevented him from savoring the shape of his verses. His banter was awkward. At one point he challenged Flamboyant in what was apparently a bit of shtick but seemed more like unseasoned confusion. His abrupt exit also came across more as a split-second decision than a well-timed move.
Rap needs astute innovators like Canibus, but he needs to relax and appreciate the pleasures of hip-hop as well as its ego-building power. Once he does that, he'll win more than battles; he just might master his own gifts.
RAP REVIEW
What beauty this hard music offered came from its clarity of purpose: to stimulate drastic physical abandon. The fans at the arena started screaming when Limp Bizkit entered and didn't stop for hours. Noise, beats and spectacle combined to cause rhythmic shaking, screaming and hair-flinging. It's an old role for music, dating back to the Eleusinian mysteries of Greece. It fueled Beatlemania, and Hanson mania, too, but don't try to tell a Korn fan that. Korn fans are tough, you see. They embrace and romanticize agony itself.
Limp Bizkit did have some fun with hip-hop-style boasts and break dancing. Mostly, though, the band stuck to outbursts. A muddle of speed metal and thrash punk with a few beats supplied by the mostly drowned-out DJ Lethal, the music hardly attained a hip-hop flow.
That didn't really matter; Limp Bizkit plumbs hip-hop mostly for a masculine bravado that comes hard to rockers now. Ice Cube demonstrated plenty of that with a set that sampled from his long career. Older political songs meshed with newer horror-movie fantasies to show how Ice Cube has made a career of imagining himself as a folk demon. At times his rhymes hit home, although his attitude and music seemed perfunctory.
Rammstein fully owned the fearless machismo Limp Bizkit lacks and Ice Cube seems bored with, although this sadomasochistic heavy metal circus takes it so far out that it becomes parody. The band's big gimmick involves fire, but beyond the flashpots and the burning clothes, Rammstein also demonstrated old-fashioned heavy metal virtuosity and an inventive use of techno and industrial elements.
Korn's members would like to think of themselves as that daring, and the band's knotty musical weave does aim for complexity. Korn's sources are very contemporary and easily recognizable: Nine Inch Nails, Rage Against the Machine, Sepultura, Marilyn Manson, Ministry, Cypress Hill. No one has meshed these sounds to make something new, and as yet, neither has Korn.
Neither is the group's message fresh, although its determined focus adds to its potency. Combining equal parts of self-loathing and spastic fury, Mr. Davis presented himself as the avenging angel for a put-upon generation. He berated hypocritical parents, and sometimes lashed out at women in a horrific way (as did Mr. Durst), but mostly his rage was self-directed.
Many young people view themselves as defenseless victims, and use hard music to overcome their inarticulate frustration. Parents who fear this music (as Korn hopes they will) do not understand that feelings of weakness, not menacing power, attract their children to it. Despite their artistic and moral defects, these bands give youths something they crave: a way to release the pain whose consequences others fear. If only more grown-ups could have been there to absorb the obvious metaphor of Korn's stage set. It consisted of two tiers of cages, filled with young volunteers, screaming to break free.
ROCK REVIEW
On Friday, the Czech soprano Eva Urbanova appeared in place of the originally announced Tosca, Daniela Dessi, who withdrew two weeks ago because of an injury. Ms. Urbanova is a genuine artist and an admirable singer. Her sizable voice throbs with rich vibrato. Her tone is dusky and earthy, rather than conventionally beautiful. However, on Friday her high notes were strained, a bit raw and sharp in pitch. And there was more intensity and expressivity in her singing than in her acting, which was seldom compelling.
The tenor Richard Leech made an energetic, athletic Mario, easily able to bound up the stairs of the scaffolding to work on his mural of Mary Magdalene in Act I, an aspect of the staging that Mr. Pavarotti forgoes these days. Vocally, Mr. Leech started out shakily, singing with dry tone and tremulous sound. But he warmed up and summoned some ringing, house-filling top notes. However, he may be paying a price for his increased emphasis on power: some of his legato singing lacked elegance and pliancy.
The French baritone Alain Fondary had a poor night as the villainous police chief, Baron Scarpia. His singing was huffy and short of breath, and he created little sense of malevolence. Mr. Santi, who is steeped in the Italian tradition, had bold ideas about the pacing and shape of this rhapsodic score. The orchestra was essentially in sync with his conception, but the cast less so: there were noticeable glitches in entrances and timing.
One is tempted to predict that the ensemble problems will easily be corrected in future performances. But the cast rotation begins on Wednesday night, when the soprano Aprile Millo arrives to sing the first of three scheduled performances as Tosca.
OPERA REVIEW
He still likes to think about the bad times, though. His concert on Friday night opened with ''Cigarettes and Alcohol,'' a song by Oasis that he covers on his latest album, ''When We Were the New Boys'' (Warner Brothers). That barroom stomper sounds like the ones he recorded with the Faces in the early 1970's; by recording it and ''Rocks,'' by Primal Scream, he neatly reclaimed a style younger bands had filched.
Yet this silk-clad showman knows better than to bring back real rock-and-roll excess, not so much because it would make a man of his age look foolish -- Mr. Stewart has never feared foolishness -- but because such displays have lost their cachet. The Gallagher brothers of Oasis seem disgusting when they overdo things. It is cooler to keep your nasty habits to yourself, or to render them theatrical, the way Marilyn Manson or the reformed Courtney Love does.
The latter method is what Mr. Stewart opted for on Friday. It would have been fun if he had let himself go just once, but his two-hour show was the epitome of calculated fun. His band and set list could have been determined by the principles of feng shui, the Chinese philosophy of balancing elements.
A virile, tattooed guitarist here, a Boyz II Men type on backing vocals there, a glam-rock dude on keyboards and a drummer as precise as a cyborg: Mr. Stewart's accompaniment provided him with every useful pop trope. The music this collection of archetypes produced stayed balanced and within bounds, the Broadway version of the singer's ouevre.
Mr. Stewart performed his array of raunchy sex odes and anthemic tearjerkers as if he were going for a Tony. His costume changes culminated with a yellow jacket that matched his Day-Glo socks. On both knees for a melodramatic ''Tonight's the Night,'' wagging his tail during ''Hot Legs,'' sprawled out and grinning at the end of ''Twistin' the Night Away,'' he humorously choreographed his enthusiasm. To demonstrate how he had kept in such good shape, he kicked soccer balls into the audience throughout the set.
As for the voice that occasioned all this madness, it remains a distinctively accessible instrument. The tenor famous for being part rooster crow and part lover's croon tips toward screechiness now, but Mr. Stewart managed a lovely falsetto on ''Have I Told You Lately?'' and belted with gusto on the night's rockers. However much he overindulged, he always cared for his vocal cords. Such prudence is just what you'd expect from a man who so skillfully turns excess into a routine.
POP REVIEW
The opera begins as Orfeo, grief-stricken over the death of his wife, Euridice, is comforted by a chorus of nymphs and shepherds. Ms. Clarke and the designer, John Conklin, set the scene in a graveyard cluttered with large rocks, against a dingy projected backdrop showing mountains ravaged by strip mining and a dusty dirt road. The dancers, in modern dress, wear black overcoats. Though the rocks present an awkward obstacle course to the dancers, the scene packs a certain degree of grim power, as does the next, when Orfeo attempts to retrieve Euridice from the underworld and is confronted by furies at the gates of hell, dashing newcomers against the rocks.
But then comes the scene in the Elysian Fields, where heroes and heroines in all their naked splendor enjoy their afterlife. The shadowy lighting by Stephen Strawbridge is effective: against a brightly lit screen, the dancers' bodies seem unearthly, radiant and eerily androgynous.
But the effect is self-consciously artistic. Moreover, the set is essentially unchanged from before, complete with Mr. Conklin's large rocks, which the dancers must gingerly climb over. That the libretto calls for the Elysian Fields to be ''a delightful region with verdant groves and flower-filled meadows'' is not sacrosanct, but as staged here this place is pretty depressing. Even in the final scene, when the elated couple return to earth, the dancers, dressed again, must contend with rocks and bleak backdrops. No doubt, Ms. Clarke is striving for a dancing-upon-the-tombstones effect, but it is clumsy and joyless.
The musical performance was also constricted. Making his company debut in the difficult role of Orfeo was a Polish-born countertenor, Artur Stefanowicz, who gave an earnest but vocally shaky performance. His essentially bright voice was frequently tight, thin-toned and wavery in pitch. Ms. Burton sang with lyricism and grace. As Amor, Robin Blitch Wiper, a sweet-voiced soprano, also made her company debut.
The conducting of Derrick Inouye was frustratingly tentative. Whole stretches of Gluck's dramatic recitative were inert. Gluck's music is magisterial, but not pompous, at least if it is performed with incisive rhythm and dramatic sensitivity.
Perhaps the musical performance will gain in confidence as the opera is repeated. A lot of attention must have gone to choreographing the striking dancers, who dominate the production. And that is the problem.
OPERA REVIEW
Then, Mr. Zukerman, an opera buff, was asked to portray the role of Cherubino in Mozart's ''Marriage of Figaro,'' by being sung to in the final scene of Act I, when the young page boy, having been ordered to the military by the count, is poked fun at by his amused friend Figaro in the aria ''Non piu andrai.'' To do the poking, and the singing, the Welsh bass-baritone Bryn Terfel bounded onstage sporting a Yankees cap, and sang at his burly best.
Mr. Zukerman had begun the concert as soloist and conductor in two violin concertos: Vivaldi's ''Il Sospetto'' and Mozart's Concerto in A, the ''Turkish.'' Mr. Zukerman, who has technique and rich tone in abundance, can sometimes slip into slick, attention-grabbing routine. But he was serious-minded and in good form here, playing with suppleness, arching line in the slow movements  and luxuriant sound.
He also conducted the United States premiere of a suite from the opera ''Los Alamos'' by his long-time colleague, the composer and pianist Marc Neikrug. The opera, which received its premiere in Berlin in 1988, seems to have a sizable theme: the impact of the atomic bomb on the Indians near the bomb's birthplace in Los Alamos, N.M. This 20-minute suite includes mostly agitated music of spiraling figures and riffs, chantlike phrases and sputtering dance rhythms, which hover over sustained pedal-tone bass lines.
The concert ended with a performance of Mozart's ''Jupiter'' Symphony that suggested why the strong players of the English Chamber Orchestra enjoy Mr. Zukerman as a conductor. He had a clear idea of the shape, character and byways of this work, but, as a respectful fellow instrumentalist, he tended to trust his musicians, to supervise but not control them. The resulting performance lacked a certain degree of incisiveness. But it had sweep and vitality, and made an impact.
MUSIC REVIEW
Cubanismo is a producer's idea, to take Cuban musicians and form a band for export, playing an older style of Cuban music, one not touched by the modern pop sometimes called timba. Being on the road has made the musicians look weary, although they brought a rhythmic surety to the music.
The tres player, Juan de la Cruz, hoarse from a cold, sang a funny song, and the front few lines of the audience danced. It was a party, and a good one.
JAZZ REVIEW
Before intermission was the Swiss album of the ''Annees de Pelerinage'': nine pictorial pieces filled with lakes, storms, pastures, valleys and bells. At their center is one of Liszt's most noble creations: the solemn ''Vallee d'Obermann'' with its inspired minor-major shift halfway through. Mr. Barenboim's octaves thundered, but clearly and rationally. He rippled through the gentle filigree of the ''Au Bord d'une Source'' yet gave it space to articulate.
So here was playing of rhapsodic music that never gave in to the self-indulgence and self-aggrandizement that so many Liszt players find irresistible. Mr. Barenboim deeply loves this music, and he respects its sincerity.
The B minor Sonata after intermission was another world. If this is Liszt's only truly abstract and consciously put-together piano piece, the philosopher's touch was conspicuously absent here. Headlong, hurtling, even wild would be the relevant adjectives. One heard the blur of raw emotion, some of it in control, some not.
This kind of playing says things about Liszt that are not untrue: that he indeed wrote performer's music, inviting the sudden decision, making room for the improvised flight of fancy. Mr. Barenboim's impetuosity reveled in the melodrama of the piece and let its logic be damned.
Performances of the B minor Sonata are ubiquitous, and every new outing becomes an ever less resistible invitation for us to snooze our way through. And why not, when we are confident that the familiar notes will transpire in the remembered way? Maybe Mr. Barenboim simply decided to deny us our customary nap. Playing this furious and this hectic, at any rate, made sure that automatic pilots would remain shut off and that attention would be paid.  MUSIC REVIEW
The pieces were superbly quirky, most of them performed at brisk tempos; there weren't any dragging suites encumbered by too-long solos, which have marred some of the band's projects. Instead, the finely detailed arrangements took apart the songs and made them kaleidoscopic.
For example, in Mr. Hampton's reworking of ''Jeepers Creepers,'' the lyric's final question -- ''where'd you get those eyes?'' -- was played like a round across the band's four trombonists, each time in a lower key. It was particularly the brass section's night; their parts arose with perfect organization and disappeared like mist.
With the big band, Ms. Freelon sang surely on ''Out of This World,'' ''That Old Black Magic'' and best of all, ''Skylark'' (rendered with particularly personal phrasing that didn't block the charms of Michael Abene's arrangement) and an encore with only a quartet, ''My Shining Hour.''
JAZZ REVIEW
The group signed an exclusive contract with Nonesuch in 1986, which has served it nobly, witness a new 10-CD set lacing reissues with new releases to commemorate the 25th anniversary. Indeed, it is on the strength of its recordings perhaps as much as its notoriously uneven concert performances that the Kronos legacy is likely to live.
So, at least, it seemed on Friday evening, as the quartet played at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music in the second of three concerts celebrating the anniversary as part of the Next Wave Festival. To begin with, the sole original work in the program, Steve Reich's ''Different Trains'' (1988), exists largely on tape (layers of Kronos performances, speech and train whistles) and presents problems of balance and clarity in concert performance.
None of which is to say that it does not also gain from live presentation, and Kronos here placed the work in a fascinating, tightly programmatic context. The evening opened with an arrangement of Harry Partch's ''U.S. Highball: A Musical Account of Slim's Transcontinental Hobo Trip'' (1943), which carries its subject on a laborious journey east to Chicago. ''Different Trains'' picked up with its first, nostalgic words, ''From Chicago to New York.''
Yet despite excellent work on the sound system throughout the night by Scott Fraser, other utterances in the more thickly layered central section of ''Different Trains,'' evoking the Holocaust, were indecipherable, and the exquisite balances of the Nonesuch recording seemed simply unattainable in the Majestic's acoustics. Still, the intensity of the performance served the work well.
As it did in ''U.S. Highball,'' although a listener had to wonder whether, on some existential level, Partch, who scored meticulously for instruments of his own invention, was still Partch when played on conventional instruments in Ben Johnston's arrangement. David Barron, in any case, was wonderfully effective in Slim's narration, now spoken, now blurted, now almost sung.
Similar questions were raised in the second half by the Kronos's presentation of Stravinsky's ''Rite of Spring,'' in an arrangement for piano and string quartet by John Geist. Played on the piano by four, or even two, hands, the score retains some of its power if little of its color; played by a string quartet, it regains some of its color if virtually none of its power. The two media married oddly and ultimately ineffectively despite excellent efforts not only from the Kronos players but also from the bright and hard-working pianist, Margaret Kampmeier.
What do you do for an encore after ''The Rite of Spring''? If you are Kronos, you do your inimitable imitation of Jimi Hendrix in ''Purple Haze,'' an indomitable show of spirit that here swept earlier reservations aside. In the end, a listener could only admire the imagination and initiative of a group that throughout its illustrious quarter-century has introduced more than 400 works written or arranged for it.
There are quartets enough that play standard repertory tidily, even brilliantly. Kronos has carved out its own valuable niche.
NEXT WAVE FESTIVAL REVIEW/MUSIC
Ms. Argerich jettisoned the Chopin Second in favor of the Liszt Piano Concerto No. 1, and Mr. Dutoit dropped the Dutilleux and offered Faure's more easygoing ''Pelleas et Melisande'' Suite. The second half of the program brought together Debussy's ''Prelude a l'Apres-midi d'un Faune'' and Mussorgsky's ''Pictures at an Exhibition,'' in Ravel's orchestration.
Even for a listener who would rather have heard the Dutilleux and the Chopin, the changes afforded little cause for complaint. One could lament the degree to which the Liszt is a flashier but musically emptier work than the Chopin, for example, and one could grumble inwardly during its opening bars; but once Ms. Argerich played the opening figure of the piano line, such concerns became trivial.
From a purely technical point of view, much of what Ms. Argerich did was stunning, not least because she is able to make it look so easy. Of particular note was the unusual combination of delicacy and insistent power that she brought to rapid passages. Elsewhere the sheer grandeur of her sound had an electrifying effect on the orchestra. Her tempos were fluid at times and volatile elsewhere. It was as though she realized that there was little point in trying to impose a sense of structure on this loosely built work. She supplied the sheer dazzle that Liszt demanded, but she made the concerto's gentler sections sing as well.
The fiery Liszt performance was surrounded by the Faure, which opened the concert, and the Debussy, which opened the second half. Both demand dynamic suppleness, a lush but transparent string tone and pastel wind coloration, and each in its own way suggests an atmosphere of dreamy unreality. The Montreal players, who have often been praised for the power of their sound, and who excel in more brightly colored music, proved more effective and affecting in these than in the program's more obvious orchestral showpiece, Mussorgsky's ''Pictures.''
The Mussorgsky had a certain visceral impact in the section from ''Catacombs'' through the final, crashing chords of ''The Great Gate of Kiev.'' But mishaps in the brass, starting in the opening ''Promenade,'' and a coarseness in the strings and winds during fortissimo sections had a tarnishing effect. And after the subtlety of his Faure and Debussy readings, Mr. Dutoit's matter-of-fact account of the Mussorgsky seemed peculiarly bland.
MUSIC REVIEW
Ms. Allen is gifted, and at her best she brings all sorts of musical ploys to the table. But she was in a meditative mood and used thick, two-handed chords ruminatively, as if she were working over memories, translating them into music. Ms. Allen, who played mostly original material, can run through a tune and find spots that can be opened up; at times she came across something in the harmony that she liked, turning a chord or a phrase into a composition of its own.
Sometimes Ms. Allen placed right-hand runs against her impressionist, dissonant chords, and it was there that the spirit of pre-1960's jazz improvisers showed up, not because of any imitation but because her virtuosity was antithetical to the mood-setting of her chordal approach. On one piece, she set her left hand rattle a bass line, placing a melody in the right hand. An ostinato set the piece jumping. Still, it was Ms. Allen's command of harmony that defined the show, the endless series of chordal passages, full of a pastoral and solitary rhetoric.
PETER WATROUS
What makes Mr. Schick look good is that his entire body seems to be gearing up to the actions the music demands, or relaxing after them. His performances are a great show, but are not done for show. Student percussionists, of whom there were many in the audience, will surely want to imitate him, but they will do so only by finding the music in their own bodies, thereby matching his lack of self-consciousness.
On this program Mr. Schick gave an electric performance of Karlheinz Stockhausen's ''Zyklus'' of 1959, the totem ancestor of the repertory, here made afresh. Mr. Schick's glissandos on the marimba turned wood into water; his volleys on unpitched instruments had fizz, crackle and shape. As Mr. Stockhausen understood, without any model to go on, the percussionist's task is to make sense of radical discontinuity, which is one reason percussion music fits into the modern age so well. (Imagine a percussion piece by Brahms. For Berlioz, it might have been possible.)
Iannis Xenakis's loud, beat-driven ''Rebonds,'' for drums and wood blocks (the latter, amplified, sounding like rifle shots bouncing around the ceiling), had a primitive charge. Brian Ferneyhough's ''Bone Alphabet'' showed that with fast and fluid rhythms, loudness can be much less of a blunt instrument. Here Mr. Schick projected alacrity, intensity and grace.
Other works he played included David Lang's vivid ''Anvil Chorus'' (seven years old and already a classic; such is the percussion time frame), Frederic Rzewski's thoughtful ''To the Earth'' and Georges Aperghis's ''Le Corps a Corps,'' in which hands at a drum suggest the noises of an unknown language.
MUSIC REVIEW
Steinbeck's story of itinerant farm workers has ample operatic potential. Its main characters, the feebleminded Lennie and his companion and protector, George, fantasize about buying a small farm of their own, thereby breaking the cycle of wandering the countryside, taking low-paying harvesting jobs and getting chased out when Lennie lands them in trouble. They nearly achieve this dream when Candy, another worker, offers to put his substantial savings at their disposal if he can join them.
There is ample foreshadowing to warn us that this plan will go awry, as well as a near tragedy when Lennie ends up in a brawl with Curley, the boss. Lennie's passion for petting soft things, but doing it so hard that he destroys them (coupled with a tendency to panic under pressure), leads him to inadvertently kill Curley's Wife.
Mr. Floyd, who wrote his own libretto, kept close to the Steinbeck story, one of his major departures being a slight expansion of the character of Curley's Wife, who is given no further name. In the novel, we get a sense of her discontentedness; in the opera, her dreams of better things parallels George's and Lennie's, and Mr. Floyd has her express them in a coloratura line.
His music otherwise is in the vernacular of mid-century tonality: it is chromatic, often declamatory, occasionally lyrical -- George, Lennie and Curley's Wife are all given plenty to work with, and it has the picturesque qualities of verismo opera. It also has an undercurrent of mildly folksy, Coplandesque melodies that have become the standard musical depiction of a Western accent, but it avoids veering too close to Copland's own ''Of Mice and Men'' film score.
The City Opera has assembled an admirable cast. Anthony Dean Griffey gives us two views of Lennie: as an actor, he astutely conveys the nuances of Lennie's childlike personality; as a singer with an attractive, focused tenor, he conveys the full measure of Lennie's vulnerability. As George, Dean Ely is vocally and dramatically well matched to Mr. Griffey, and the rich timbre of his bass-baritone enlivened both his solo turns and ensembles. Nancy Allen Lundy handled Curley's Wife's music with agility and a nicely understated sweetness that made her more sympathetic than Steinbeck's character. And Joel Sorenson made the most of the few lines afforded the bellicose Curley.
There were also fine contributions from Julian Patrick, as Candy, and Victor Benedetti, as Slim, the levelheaded leader of the workers. The singers' English diction was fine all around, but the company used supertitles nevertheless, a prudent move in so big a house. As it happened, the orchestra, which played reasonably well under Stewart Robertson's baton, often overpowered the singers.
OPERA REVIEW
Through all these qualifications, Mr. Sheik projected the calm bemusement of a man resigned to success. His songs are beautiful, and he can't seem to help it. The selections he played from his self-titled 1996 Atlantic Records debut and its just-released follow-up, ''Humming,'' uninhibitedly indulged in gorgeous songcraft.
An intricate rhythmic base anchored by the percussionist Juliet Krager gently buoyed Jerry Leonard's bell-like guitar and Mr. Sheik's own Spanish-influenced playing. The sound ebbed and flowed almost imperceptibly; at times, the band was playing quite loudly, but the music's build was wavelike and seemingly weightless.
Above these swells, Mr. Sheik sang in a sleepy, seductive voice about the ephemeral nature of desire. A Buddhist as well as a heartthrob, he writes lyrics that try to blend romanticism and transcendent wisdom. Hardly the only pop star currently exploring the cosmos, Mr. Sheik does not always hit upon profundities. But he does create a musical environment that evokes the spiritual state he seeks, adding just enough human longing to maintain an exquisite tension.
He does this by trading pop's usual drama for a diffuse flow that comes closer to ambient music. This is not music for meditation in the New Age sense; the words and Mr. Sheik's almost aggressive rhythm guitar displayed too much personality for that. Rather, it is music as meditation, an aural recreation of the contemplative state in which one allows one's thoughts to drift by without grasping at them.
The sound's essence seemed to float from player to player, arising when a finger cymbal crash propelled a bass line, or when Mr. Sheik's falsetto intertwined with Mr. Leonard's vibrating chords. This approach recalled the experiments of Joni Mitchell, as well as Brian Wilson and Nick Drake, both of whom Mr. Sheik mentioned in one song.
Rejecting the liberating expressionism of most pop for this more refined endeavor, Mr. Sheik pursues a grace that stays shy of catharsis. Some may find it too pretty. But its smooth surfaces go surprisingly deep.
POP REVIEW
Mr. Strauss's opening work, a Bach sonata, with Lionel Party at the harpsichord, was oddly wiry and unfocused. Where he excelled was in more recent music, particularly works that demand a Romantic glow and a measure of virtuosic display. In Wieniawski's Variations on an Original Theme, he soared easily through rapid flourishes and details, and he played them with the uncommonly sweet tone and judicious use of portamento that was favored by violinists in the early decades of the century. The graciously spun themes of Korngold's ''Much Ado About Nothing'' Suite benefited similarly from Mr. Strauss's timbre and sense of style, and from Rohan de Silva's solid collaboration at the piano.
Mr. Strauss showed other strengths in the more sober side of his program. The Schoenberg Phantasy was illuminated by a rugged, rhythmically vital account in which Mr. Strauss brought an edge to his warm timbre by mixing in a slightly acidic undercurrent. He also collaborated with Wolfgang Emanuel Schmidt, a cellist, on an incandescent reading of Kodaly's Duo.
ALLAN KOZINN
MUSIC IN REVIEW: CLASSICAL MUSIC
But this turned out to be not just an occasion for acknowledging the renowned career of an indisputably great singer. In the ceremony following the performance, Mr. Pavarotti said that he had wanted in his gala to prove to himself that after 30 years he could still sing. And that he did.
The program showcased Mr. Pavarotti in complete acts of three operas from the three main areas of his repertory. He sang the bel canto role of Nemorino in Act II of Donizetti's ''Elisir d'Amore,'' the lirico spinto role of Rodolfo in Act III of ''Boheme and the weightier heroic role of Radames in Act IV of Verdi's ''Aida.'' Understandably, his voice has faded. He started off tentatively in the Donizetti and sang with noticeable caution throughout the afternoon. He now has to negotiate high pianissimo phrases, which were once his glory.
But he sounded fully prepared and determined; he paced himself well and never really faltered. There were moments of beautiful singing to savor, flashes of Mr. Pavarotti in his prime, when he combined an unsurpassable sense of language with an instinctive understanding of style and sheer vocal charisma.
Though Mr. Pavarotti is still a bit shaky on his feet, he has lost considerable weight (at least 70 pounds, a colleague of his said) and looks fitter than he has in years. In ''L'Elisir,'' he even took some dance spins with the soprano Ruth Ann Swenson, who sang Adina. He may still be adjusting to the weight loss, for his voice sometimes lacked support. But the vocal colorings remain a marvel.
His colleagues seemed palpably excited to be part of the occasion. Ms. Swenson was in exquisite voice. The soprano Daniela Dessi was Mr. Pavarotti's lovely Mimi in ''La Boheme.'' And one hopes the heated lovers' quarrel that Dwayne Croft as Marcello and Ainhoa Arteta as Musetta enacted in the final quartet was not based on real-life experience: the couple were married last year.
Maria Guleghina stepped in on short notice as Aida for the indisposed Aprile Millo. In the earlier trial scene, the powerhouse mezzo-soprano Dolora Zajick smoldered through the music of Amneris, spurring Mr. Pavarotti on to his most impassioned singing and winning herself a frenzied ovation. James Levine, who has given Mr. Pavarotti solid support over their years together at the Met, conducted with his customary excellence.
Afterward, during a ceremony onstage, Mr. Levine; the Met general manager, Joseph Volpe; all the participants, and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani led the tribute, while a grateful audience roundly ignored the Met's ban on flash photography.
There will be no 35th-anniversary gala at the Met for Mr. Pavarotti; that seems sure. Even his close colleague Joan Sutherland has suggested publicly that it would be wise for him to retire. Still, if a young tenor arrived tomorrow sounding as he did yesterday, we would all be proclaiming a great new voice on the scene.
MUSIC REVIEW
The performances here, with Nigel North, Romanesca's founder, on theorbo and John Toll on harpsichord, were gritty and compelling. Mr. Manze himself was a marvel, at times turning a halting ornamentation into exalted speech, as in a sonata by Giovanni Paolo Cima; at others using his bow virtually as a paintbrush, as in a sonata by Biber.
Mr. North and Mr. Toll each played eloquent solo numbers, the only way to get out from the shadow of Mr. Manze's blinding virtuosity.
JAMES R. OESTREICH
MUSIC IN REVIEW: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Tribe Called Quest, whose Tuesday show was, as Q-Tip said, the final New York performance of its 10-year career (its new album, ''The Love Movement,'' on Jive/MCA, is also its last) goes far enough back in time to use what's now an element lost from hip-hop --the softer, more changeable emotions of male soul singers. Q-Tip's voice, unusually high and boyish, is its promontory.
The group used electric pianos and acoustic basses, intimating jazz and making music that a fan could grow up with a bit rather than discarding after adolescence; it was sexual, wry and funny, coming with a range of expression that could include anger, satire, constructive preaching, and sentimentality; it was conscious of black entertainment's past.
The group's final show felt appropriately low key and businesslike; it wasn't the stop-and-start chaos of most rap concerts. The members, well rehearsed, worked in complete unity, which few rap groups want to do anymore. They finished one another's sentences; they worked out tag-team routines with their words and bodies that became elaborate in ''Bonita Applebaum,'' ''I Left My Wallet in El Segundo'' and ''Buggin' Out,'' as if the performers were connected by pulleys.
They took fans' requests, with the stipulation that they wouldn't do songs that were hits or had been made into videos. (That lasted for four or five songs, all of which they stopped after a few verses.) And Q-Tip, noting the range of races in the crowd and marveling at hip-hop's capacity to reach across young audiences, took a moment to address the crowd: ''We sincerely want to thank you for investing your time, because time is really precious, and in hip-hop 10 years is unheard of.''
With the group, a sensibility worth aspiring to has vanished, a kind of urbane restraint. It's not a good thing for hip-hop that the band is gone.
POP REVIEW
The poets ranged from Edna St. Vincent Millay to Dorothy Parker to Frank O'Hara, with the centerpiece a cycle of six songs set to the poetry of Marie Howe and dealing with the death of a beloved brother.
Stylistically, Mr. Gordon, who accompanied Ms. McCarthy on piano, could be described as an eclectic pragmatist. Without soaring to lofty romantic heights, his music faithfully followed the mercurial moods of the texts. Musical influences from Gershwin to Debussy to Satie to the lighter side of Kurt Weill were apparent.
Together, Mr. Gordon's music and Ms. Howe's clear, unfussy poetry captured the emotional shadow play of grief, focusing on those moments during mundane activities when you suddenly become acutely aware of your loss and of the preciousness of the moment.
Often using changing rhythmic pulses to suggest subtle changes in mood, Mr. Gordon's music was impressive in its clarity and relaxed melodicism. As an interpreter, Ms. McCarthy emphasized the everyday, down-to-earth tone of Ms. Howe's poetry, expressing just enough feeling to lend the cycle an arching sadness.
CABARET REVIEW
Strauss never lost his love for the horn, his father's instrument, and among the pleasures of the rest of the program was the splendid playing of Mr. Myers's colleagues, en masse and in solos. But everyone else, too, was in excellent shape. Mr. Masur's slightly abrasive touch -- the rasp in his musical voice -- served its best functions in giving the orchestra a driving, striving energy and in exploring details of texture. I never knew there was so much to be heard in the introduction to the second of the ''Four Last Songs.''
The playing all through was responsive to Mr. Masur and to the music, being vivid, muscular and powerful at the big climaxes. One also understood how Mr. Masur's reluctance to relax and luxuriate, his busy insistence, may be a thoughtful reaction to the nature of the hall. There were moments in ''Don Juan,'' especially, where Strauss was clearly expecting his big sounds to resonate. In Fisher Hall, nothing happened.
Luxury was present at the end, though, in the voice of Ms. Voigt, who sounded as magnificent as she looked, robed in gold and russet shot silk. Indeed, the ''Four Last Songs'' suit her so well that surely she should have them from memory. After a momentary tricky start (the low register is her least strength), she went on producing streams of rich tones, beautifully formed and projected with perfect ease. These may be sunset songs, but the voice they recall is that of youth, and here Ms. Voigt, in her purity and inner livelinesss, recalled her Chrysothemis a few years back at the Met. In the violin solos, Glenn Dicterow was admirable, taking his time, getting everything right.
MUSIC REVIEW
She had the requisite temperament for the impassioned final moments of ''To Forget So Soon,'' a despairing song of a woman abandoned by her lover, yet brought melancholic beauty to ''Not a Word, O My Friend,'' a song of loss and grief.
There was also a beguiling performance of a Tchaikovsky novelty: ''Melodies Francaises,'' three songs to French texts, including a serenade, which served as a reminder that this tormented composer could write frothy salon music when he wanted to.
The highlight was Shostakovich's ''Satires,'' a set of five songs composed in 1960 for the soprano Galina Vishnevskaya. The texts by Sasha Chorny take barbed (but veiled) pokes at sundry topics, including promises of a better life for all under new political regimes, and even one jab at critics. Ms. Rodgers, who sang brilliantly, captured the bitter humor and irony in the music, ably abetted by Mr. Martineau.
There were also vivid performances of songs by Wolf and Strauss, including the latter's ''Begegnung'' and ''Rote Rosen,'' written when he was, respectively, 15 and 19. The songs show Strauss already putting the screws on current harmonic thinking.
''Take that, Brahms,'' he seems to be saying. Ms. Rodgers sang them elegantly.
MUSIC REVIEW
The ''her'' in ''Powder Her Face'' is real. The Duchess of Argyll married well, spent accordingly and -- as documented in a glorious divorce trial of the 1950's -- had a taste for the hired help.
Mr. Ades, a young and promising British composer, presents her in eight disconnected and chronologically scrambled scenes. They range from conquest in the prime of life to dispossession in old age. There are only four players: three of them in a number of roles, Maire O'Brien a constant as the Duchess.
Mr. Ades's music uses what it finds in the vicinity. Much of the opera transpires in the age of swing bands and Cole Porter songs, so the bright parodies of their music signal a specific period. Richard Strauss and the Viennese operetta also show up in fractured form. Schubert's ''Death and the Maiden,'' appearing in two keys rather than the usual one, says a brief hello.
The composer's seeming fixation on the music of his grandparents is, I think, more than just historical illustration. It speaks about the extraordinary power of nostalgia in current musical culture, felt even by people in their 20's. Objects of satire are by nature the objects of affection as well, and Mr. Ades's neat approximation of a 1930's ballad, sung fetchingly by Trevor Smith, shows where the composer's heart may actually lie.
The use of his sources is more up to date. Mr. Ades writes shattered music. Think of a musical episode as a piece of glass lying flat that has been struck by a hammer. The glass is in many pieces, but the pieces remain close enough together that we know where they originally fit. Thus melodic line and metric design arrive in fragments, and they are far from symmetrical. The results are fun to listen to but were not easy for the Brooklyn Philharmonic's small band of winds, accordion, percussion and strings. Set to one side of the Majestic's stage and bravely led by Robert Spano, the Brooklyn players wrestled fiercely with the difficult music.
Mr. Ades's instrumental tricks are somewhat exhibitionist, but the various doorbells, deep-woodwind burps, glissando sighs and whispers of percussion are too amiable to shock. They also parallel what is going on onstage. Indeed, the Duchess's episodes of graphic copulation, even with Lewinskian variations thereon, are too joyous to be lurid.
Mr. Ades's solution to composing at the end of the 20th century seems sensible. Rather than deciding on one musical language from the many around him, he uses them all.
The fixed set by Anne C. Patterson is a scaffold, a staircase and little more. The Duchess's bedroom furniture is hideously draped and covered as only the British know how to do. Ms. Patterson's costumes leap adroitly from one period to the next. Edward Berkeley's direction does the same.
Ms. O'Brien solidly occupies her central role. Mr. Smith is a charmer. Heather Buck sings various parts beautifully and looks like a million dollars. Allen Schrott's cadaverous presence as the Duke and the Hotel Manager is very helpful to the evening.
As his chamber music here showed last season, Mr. Ades has an interesting mind and a heartening frame of reference. ''Powder Her Nose'' is a delightful entertainment as well, and it recycles received information with style. Does greatness threaten, as his British fans insist? Let's just say that we have a distinctive composer among us and that it will be fun to follow his progress.
This is a joint production of the Brooklyn Philharmonic and the Brooklyn Academy of Music and is part of the Next Wave Festival. There are performances tonight and Saturday.
NEXT WAVE FESTIVAL REVIEW
THE metaphor of the melting pot is now desperately unfashionable, but you cannot begin to tell the story of American music without recourse to it. Virtually every musical idiom that has left its mark on our culture -- jazz, musical comedy, country, bluegrass, rock -- has been the product of ethnic hybridization. Even the best American classical music bears its stamp: witness Aaron Copland, whose ''American-sounding'' music was composed by a Brooklyn-born Jew of Russian lineage who studied in France and salted his scores with jazz-derived syncopations, Mexican folk tunes and cowboy ballads.
As Copland's example suggests, musical crossbreeding also frequently involves a like encounter between vernacular and cultivated traditions -- what Philip Rahv famously called ''redskin and paleface.'' Though Perry Meisel makes no mention of Rahv's dichotomy in ''The Cowboy and the Dandy,'' it is hard to overlook its distant echoes in this intelligent but poorly focused exploration of the wellsprings of postwar pop music.
According to Meisel, a part-time rock critic and full-time professor of English at New York University who has previously written on Thomas Hardy, Virginia Woolf and Walter Pater, rock is the product of a confluence of ''country and city'' -- 19th-century English Romanticism and African-American blues tradition -- that is prefigured in the process by which the small-group ''jump'' jazz of urban jukebox idols of the 1940's like Louis Jordan evolved into full-fledged rhythm and blues. ''Rock-and-roll,'' Meisel writes, ''is the crossing of cowboy and dandy. If you grew up on westerns and Sherlock Holmes, your destiny was rock-and-roll. . . . Little Richard, Jimi Hendrix, Prince -- all balance in a single style the cowboy's strength, the dandy's charm; the cowboy's rage, the dandy's melancholia.''
Interwoven is a parallel discussion of the cowboy and the dandy in English and American literature. ''Much as rhythm and blues is the link between jazz and rock-and-roll,'' Meisel asserts, ''estheticism is the link between Romanticism and literary modernism.'' But he is more interesting when talking about music, though the ostentatious erudition of ''The Cowboy and the Dandy'' fails to conceal its author's sometimes shaky grasp of musical fundamentals; he seems to think, for example, that Charlie Parker and the beboppers were the first to introduce to jazz the ''Euro-harmonics'' that were in fact present from its earliest days.
The use of a loaded term like ''Euro-harmonics'' is a dead give-away that Meisel is dealing from a politically stacked deck. Not that there are all that many dead give-aways in this often indigestible prose, which is full of clotted sentences that only a post-modern literary scholar could love: ''Jazz's originary and agonistic relation to European music proceeds, moreover, by means of its use of fugitive African sources as the only defense at first available with which to deflect the discourse of the oppressor.''
Meisel's sludgy style will come as no surprise to those masochists who keep up with high academic fashion. Small wonder that the fruits of contemporary scholarship in the humanities are so widely viewed with contemptuous incomprehension by nonscholarly critics and the common reader, since the members of the professoriate are so reluctant to translate their ideas into the plain English of the public intellectual. In most cases, of course, translation would be an exercise in futility -- jargon-jugglers are rarely capable of disciplined thought -- but I suspect there is a genuinely worthy book lurking somewhere in the midst of ''The Cowboy and the Dandy,'' which contains unexpectedly shrewd comments on such varied figures as Muddy Waters and Willa Cather. Alas, Meisel has not taken the trouble to write it, and so it isn't likely that very many people will take the trouble to read it.
Terry Teachout is the music critic of Commentary and a contributing writer for Time magazine. He is writing a biography of H. L. Mencken.
Dressed in sleek black and settling on a stool, he surveyed the crowd with doe-eyed apprehension, as if he wasn't sure this was a good idea and softly complained that it was far past his bedtime. (It was 1 A.M.) An accomplice played acoustic guitar, and Rachid sang alone. He performed ''Pride,'' a breakup song, and ''Zoe's World,'' which uses blindness as a metaphor for tolerance. In ''Back to the Room,'' he meditated on solitude and shook loose anxieties about race, sex and bodily strength. ''Where are my 40 acres?'' he sang out in a tortured cry. ''I'm not black enough, I ain't white enough/Burning white Christmas crosses/break all the Santa Clauses.'' Then, in a light, angelic falsetto, ''oh mother dear.''
He poured all his energy into two songs associated with Stevie Nicks, ''Gypsy'' and ''Landslide,'' dramatic lovers' fantasies that were both on his emotional wavelength, and the songs sounded as if they had sprouted new dimensions with his full melismatic treatment. And then he stopped, explaining that he hadn't prepared anything else. The packed crowd was disappointed, verging on angry, but the early finish was in character for Rachid. He seemed to have made the melancholy decision that adulation was nice, but life was too short for tiring himself out.
POP REVIEW
But Mr. Goerne's adroitness as a physical comedian came as a surprise. Light on his feet, he can wobble his knees with fear when the Queen of the Night beckons, and shimmy his hips with anticipation when he finally meets his wife-to-be. He also brought a welcome degree of restraint to a role often ruined by aggressive charm. This Papageno was endearingly befuddled when his little rituals of life were interrupted.
Another German singer, the bass Franz-Josef Selig, made his debut as Sarastro. Mr. Selig's voice, while not enormous, is a rich, full bass that extends comfortably and clearly into the depths of this famously low-lying role. While Sarastro, the high priest of the temple of Isis and Osiris, does not invite subtlety of interpretation, Mr. Selig had the requisite stature and presence. Laura Aikin, an American coloratura soprano, made her debut as the Queen of the Night, singing with agility and clear, bright tone. In the Queen's touchstone aria of revenge, ''Die Holle Rache,'' with its notorious high F's, Ms. Aikin sang brilliantly, if not with complete accuracy of pitch. But she is a singer to watch.
The tenor Paul Groves was a youthful and sympathetic Prince Tamino. His sweet lyric voice has grown in size and taken on some darker colors since his Met debut six seasons ago. He occasionally had trouble supporting his upper notes. Still, his singing was tender and beautifully phrased. The soprano Dawn Upshaw, who sang with her customary creamy tone and arching lyricism, was a refreshingly feisty Pamina. Her performance of the young woman's aria of quiet despair, ''Ach, Ich fuhl's,'' seemed somewhat uneasy, but that may have been the result of mixed signals with the conductor, the well-respected Sir Charles Mackerras. On this occasion, he seemed overly intent on keeping the music moving. He began several arias and ensembles too quickly for his singers, and wound up having to pull back the tempos along the way.
The three ladies were sung by Claudia Waite (in her Met debut), Jane Bunnell and Delores Ziegler. Dennis Petersen made an unctuous, entertainingly evil Monostatos. John Cheek was a formidable Speaker, and Yvonne Gonzales was a delightful Papagena. The stage director Robin Guarino worked well with the cast.
Apparently the colors on Mr. Hockney's painted sets have just been spruced up. The lighting may not have been quite right, for they seemed a bit dusty. Still, the sets and costumes remain marvelous, whimsically convincing you that there is not all that much cosmic distance between the make-believe world of ancient Egypt and the modern-day world of Los Angeles, complete with Hockney swimming pools and palm trees.
OPERA REVIEW

Ms. Horn is almost too subtle to be understood. A piece of the melody came out dry; then she bent one note. As the arrangements charged and burst around her she waited patiently, then sang a fluttering melody or a long note. And when she wanted, she quietly sang a note of the chord played by the orchestra; she was doing it for herself.
She sang ''Love for Sale,'' ''Wouldn't It Be Loverly'' and ''I Got Plenty O' Nuttin','' and not having to direct her trio freed her up. She sang them with a sense of humor and lightness. Though she's known among musicians as a pianist, the liberties she was taking with the songs and the steady, unflappable chain of ideas she brought to the music made the music bristle with intelligence and care. And though Ms. Horn was singing older songs, and investing them with all sorts of realism, she seemed to be presenting just a small part of herself. You almost wanted her to stop and explain her reaction to the material, to hear more about her relationship to her songs.
She opened the first half with a set of trio pieces, throwing in a number, ''The Old Country,'' by Nat Adderley, that wasn't on the program. On ''Fever,'' she used stop-time sections and let her voice drift through blues ideas. Her piano playing, against the drummer Steve Williams's cymbal work, used upper-register dissonances and sliding chords, and it showed why so many musicians love her playing. Wynton Marsalis came out to play with the trio on ''I've Got the World on a String''; obbligatos behind singers aren't his strong point. Mr. Horn's art is evasive, but once you enter her system, her way of thinking, she presents you with a world all her own.
JAZZ REVIEW
Swing music is at the center of the aptly titled 1996 independent film ''Swingers,'' and it's being used in television commercials for the Gap to push khaki pants. It revived the dancing career of Frankie Manning, 84, a retired postal worker in New York City who was once considered the best swing dancer in the world as he danced his way through the 1930's in Harlem. It's being played in punk bars and hailed as an alternative to the depressing, antisocial sounds of grunge. It is even being heard in country bars where patrons do jive-oriented line dances to its pounding beat.
One of the three leading swing bands, Big Bad Voodoo Daddy from Los Angeles, will be in the halftime shows of the Super Bowl and the Orange Bowl next month after playing Atlantic City last summer.
Scotty Morris, founder and lead singer of Big Bad Voodoo Daddy, and his counterparts in Cherry Poppin' Daddies and the Brian Setzer Orchestra, who labored mostly in obscurity until this year, say artistry and musicianship are the keys to swing. But many of those caught up in the movement would argue that dancing is what counts.
For decades, dancing has meant rock-and-roll, which has meant bopping on a dance floor essentially by yourself, said Laura Gilford, a Manhattan-based dance instructor who teaches swing at Shout in Plainfield, Reddy's in Long Branch and the Somerset Hills Y.M.C.A., among other places. Ms. Gilford started teaching a variety of dances part time about a year ago. Now she teaches swing full time and still cannot keep up with all the requests for lessons.
''Couples dancing is a way for a man and woman to communicate,'' she said. ''The man leads and gives strength. It's a way for a woman to express her personality and her attitude in her style and flair to her partner and to the people watching.''
Swing started coming back in the late 1980's in California but has swept the country in the last few months, in part just because it is so much fun, said Lenny Lelinko of Wall Township, better known as the disc jockey and band promoter Lenny Lounge. Swing ''is 1990's rebellion in a positive way,'' said Mr. Lelinko, 41, a self-described ex-punker who is starting a swing club called the Leopard Lounge at Club Bene in Sayreville. ''The energy is appealing, plus it is more romantic and more social'' than other recent musical phenomena, he said.
At the Hunka Bunka Ballroom in Sayreville, which features all types of music for the 20-something crowd, a special party featuring the Cherry Poppin' Daddies recently packed the ballroom. The club wants to try swing with dance lessons on a regular basis, said Joey Pignatelli, its promotions director. On the Trenton waterfront, Katmandu has offered swing lessons on Sundays for most of this year.
Resorts Casino Hotel in Atlantic City  booked the Brian Setzer Orchestra more than two years ago. Mr. Setzer, a Long Island native who fronted the now-defunct Stray Cats in the 1980's, has since played his version of rockabilly swing at the Trump Marina Resort and Casino several times.
''The first time, it was a struggle in terms of attendance,'' said Steve Gietka, executive director of entertainment and public relations at the Trump Marina. ''But after that first time, we have sold out every show. Then we booked Big Bad Voodoo Daddy last March, and it caught us by surprise. We put them in the small theater with 500 seats, and we had one of the longest lines waiting to get in that we have ever seen.''
The casino now plans a regular Sunday night swing session with dance lessons. The concertgoers are easy to spot on the casino floor, Mr. Gietka said, because they dress the part in zoot suits, flip fedoras and wide ties for the men, and circle skirts, saddle oxfords and anklets for the women.
W E were a rock band, and we looked awful,'' said Steve Perry, lead singer of the Cherry Poppin' Daddies, based in Eugene, Ore. ''Then we got into swing, and we wanted to look good. It seems like people understand us better when we dress up.''
Mr. Morris of Big Bad Voodoo Daddy agreed. ''It shows respect for the music,'' he said. ''We have the best-looking suits in town.''
Swing music now comes in two forms: regulation 17-piece big bands that play acoustic and reproduce the sounds of the 1930's, and the new upstart swingers, eight- or nine-piece bands that combine rock-and-roll, jazz, blues, punk, ska and a lot more to write new songs that have the rhythm and energy of the old swing.
The Brass Tacks, a big band based in Ocean County that plays original arrangements of 1930's tunes by Louis Prima, Duke Ellington and Glenn Miller, has also seen a jump in popularity.
''It amazes me lately to see the young people outnumber the older people on the dance floor,'' said Paul Clauss, a Brass Tacks founder and its lead trombonist.
Rock-oriented groups writing their own music still use a lot of horns for a rich, complicated brand of music, but the bands just as often feature an electric guitar out front. The sound appeals to young people who were bored and ready for a change, Mr. Morris said, and playing electric makes the sound as big as the 17-piece orchestras. (Most of these bands have eight or nine members.)
''This is American roots music,'' he said. ''It goes back to New Orleans jazz, and that's as American as it gets.'' The sound has a lot of followers and is still growing but will eventually fade, Mr. Perry predicts, because this is a disposable society.
But some fans will stay. ''Once you learn swing dance, you're not going to throw that away,'' he said. The bands that have talent will have staying power, and the music will probably retain its appeal. It is fun with an attitude.
GREGG CARPENTER BAND  Katmandu  Route 29, Waterfront Park, Trenton  Tonight at 7 P.M.; swing dance lessons from 5 to 6 P.M. Swing and rhythm-and-blues jam, Wednesday at 6 P.M.  (609) 393-7300
BLUES JUMPERS  Wave Nightclub, Trump Marina, Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard, Atlantic City  Tonight at 8 P.M.; swing dance lessons before show. Free.  (800) 777-8477
FLIPPED FEDORAS  Leopard Lounge at Club Bene  Route 35, Sayreville  Saturday at 10 P.M.; swing dance lessons, 9 P.M.  (732) 727-3000
POP MUSIC
In 1975, having studied piano at the conservatory in Ghent, Belgium (and also having pursued medicine and psychiatry), he founded the Collegium Vocale, a choral ensemble to perform music by Bach and his forerunners. Later he formed the choir La Chapelle Royale to perform music from before and after the Baroque period, including contemporary works. His discography on the Harmonia Mundi label exceeds 40 recordings. Three of his recent releases are especially rewarding.
Bach: Mass in B Minor
Mr. Herreweghe's new recording of Bach's Mass in B minor (HMC 901614.15, two disks) immediately takes a place among the best currently available. The undulant tempo and pacing in the great opening ''Kyrie eleison'' chorus are a refreshing break from the pulsating forward motion that so often characterizes performances by Baroque specialists, performances so driven that you would think a ballet mistress, rapping a staff on the floor in 4/4 time, had pushed the conductor aside. With Mr. Herreweghe there is just a quality of natural breathing and inevitability.
In the ''Christe eleison'' duet for two sopranos, Mr. Herreweghe has encouraged his singers, Johannette Zomer and Veronique Gens, to bend the phrases with unmannered lyricism, and he obviously doesn't scowl, like some Baroque purists, at a touch of rich vibrato in the voice. Without any loss to spirituality, Mr. Herreweghe encourages the instrumentalists to play with bold musical character. For example, in the bass aria ''Quoniam tu solus sanctus,'' the low-lying parts for Baroque bassoons and horn are rendered with a burly playfulness, almost like the music of the chiding grandfather in Prokofiev's ''Peter and the Wolf.''
The soloists are excellent, especially the tenor Christoph Pregardien. This is a distinguished recording.
Schutz: 'Musikalische Exequien'
Mr. Herreweghe has been a strong advocate of the under-appreciated German master Heinrich Schutz. Born in 1585, exactly 100 years before Bach, Schutz was primarily a composer of sacred music. If Mr. Herreweghe is a ''gentle giant'' among conductors, as he has been called, the term might equally well be applied to Schutz's place among composers.
The ''Musikalische Exequien,'' which Mr. Herreweghe performs with La Chapelle Royale (HMD 941261, one disk), is a deeply spiritual yet humanely direct work, written as a response to horrendous plague, illness and war. The toll on Schutz himself had been devastating: within a short span of time he lost both parents, his young wife, his only brother and his two daughters.
The work, which, untypical for sacred works of the time, is written in the composer's vernacular German, calls for a small complement of soloists, chorus and continuo instruments. The melancholic, consoling music is consistently subdued in tempo and dynamics, yet Mr. Herreweghe and his forces beautifully capture the intricacy, delicacy and quiet willpower of the score. A remarkable recording of a tender masterpiece.
Brahms: 'Ein Deutsches Requiem'
Like the Schutz work, Brahms's ''Deutsches Requiem'' is a subdued personal remembrance by a German master. In its pacing, breadth and conception, Mr. Herre weghe's performance  (HMC 901608, one disk) recalls those magisterial recordings by Otto Klemperer and Herbert von Karajan. But here, the use of period instruments (L'Orchestre des Champs Elysees, which Mr. Herreweghe founded in 1991), the combined choirs of La Chapelle Royale and Collegium Vocale and two fine soloists (the soprano Christiane Oelze and the baritone Gerald Finley) bring a wonderful transparency to the score. For example, Brahms's bass lines, often doubled by tuba and brass, which can sound both muddled and overpowering on modern instruments, emerge with presence and nuance.
But the main value of this recording is, again, the calming beauty of Mr. Herreweghe's music making. When he conducts the hymnal ''Herr, lehre doch mich'' chorus, he captures the same soft-spoken expressivity of the Schutz. You realize that what links these two distant composers is more striking that what separates them.
It was simply bad, appallingly bad, a jumble of clunky, pointlessly ornate sets and unbecoming costumes, dimly lighted and further blurred by annoying scrims. The cast, with the respected soprano Ruth Ann Swenson singing her first Lucia at the house, seemed to have been given scant direction, for everyone performed with barely concealed panic. The production was all the more distressing coming just two weeks after the grotesquely overdone new production by Franco Zeffirelli of Verdi's ''Traviata,'' which most critics savaged.
How can the Met go so wrong? This is, after all, the most prestigious and powerful opera company in the world, with an operating budget this year of $165 million. For a major production, like ''La Traviata,'' the Met will spend some $2.5 million (including everything from materials to hotel rooms for visiting crews). But an operatic production is not just a theatrical showcase for a concert in costume. Opera is theater, and even on a musical level the fine singers the Met can attract need the coaching of a strong and insightful production team to fully realize their portrayals. The public  assumes that the Met should be able to recruit any director or designer it wants. It that not true?
Addressing the question recently, Joseph Volpe, the Met's general manager, offered a typically feisty rebuttal. ''You can get younger, talented designers and directors and let them take some risks with 20th-century works,'' he said. ''And also for less central works in the repertory. Not as much is at stake, and our record here is strong.'' Hard-core, knowledgeable opera fans, he added, will turn out for unusual repertory, and they mostly welcome innovation and freshness.
The troubles have mostly come from productions of the ''bread-and-butter operas,'' as Mr. Volpe called them, that appeal to the larger public. ''When we do the 'Bohemes,' the 'Toscas,' the 'Traviatas,' we have to find something that will serve us for 20 or 25 years in the style that works for our public,'' he said. ''And we need to keep the public happy, to some extent.
''We need to do these operas in a traditional way and it is more and more difficult to find producers who can do this. It's becoming a thing of the past.''
Exactly. The sumptuously grand 19th-century approach seems increasingly incongruous as the 21st century looms. For years, Mr. Zeffirelli had the market for the traditional cornered. Many critics have been stupefied by his extravagant productions of, say, Puccini's ''Tosca'' and ''Turandot.'' (The New York Times critic Bernard Holland, describing  the Imperial Palace scene in ''Turandot'' with its blindingly silvery sets and tacky opulence, once wrote, ''If the gods eat dim sum, they certainly do it in a place like this.'' But these Zeffirelli extravaganzas have been luring audiences to the house for years.
Mr. Zeffirelli's record in recent years is abysmal. Yet the Met can't seem to stop pouring millions down ''the Zeffirelli sinkhole,'' as the critic Manuela Hoelterhoff put it in her new book, ''Cinderella & Company,'' an incisive and hilariously honest examination of the Cecilia Bartoli phenomenon and the backstage opera world. Mr. Zeffirelli, who is 75, was ''once a charming provider of suitably flamboyant shows, including a picturesque 'La Boheme,' '' Ms. Hoelterhoff writes, but has become ''a long-in-the-tooth recycler of sequins and non sequiturs.''
Mr. Zeffirelli's new production of Bizet's ''Carmen'' two seasons ago was a clueless, chaotic disaster, with a menagerie of horses, donkeys and doggies mixed into the crowd scenes. ''There were so many overdressed Spaniards, lurching cripples, cavorting urchins and raggedy beggars milling around the plaza,'' Ms. Hoelterhoff writes, ''Maria Callas herself could have come and gone unnoticed.''
Yet when the Met wanted a new ''Traviata,'' it turned, almost desperately, to Mr. Zeffirelli, who was responsible for the smotheringly opulent previous ''Traviata.''
Jurgen Flimm, a touted German director, and the designer Erich Wonder had first been entrusted with the job, Mr. Volpe explained: ''They had a couple of good ideas, but they came in with designs that made Paris look like Vienna. It wasn't going anywhere.''
With the dates fixed, Mr. Volpe called Mr. Zeffirelli, who was initially uninterested. ''So I said, 'Franco, I really need you to do it.' '' Mr. Volpe recounted. ''He was the only one who could deliver in a short time something that would work for the Met. I believe he did.''
Critics have ripped into the gaudy results. I would love to be a fly on the wall when the female dancers dressed as cows in spotted leotards with horned headdresses wait in the wings to enter the decadent Act III  party scene, which even Mr. Volpe admitted is over the top.
But, he also pointed out that audiences have been oohing and ahhing their approval of the sets and spectacle. The Met serves different segments of operagoers, and some patrons continue to adore Mr. Zeffirelli's notion of grandeur.
In recent seasons, some of the strongest Met productions have been in 20th-century repertory, as Mr. Volpe emphasized. Knowing that core audiences will come, the company takes more chances. Mr. Volpe singled out Tim Albery's abstract production of Britten's ''Midsummer Night's Dream,'' Graham Vick's vividly modern updating of Shostakovich's ''Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District'' and Mark Lamos's spare yet imposing production of Berg's ''Wozzeck'' (which is returning on April 17). Critics differed on these productions, but each represented imaginative and strong work, and if the houses were not full, audiences were overwhelmingly enthusiastic.
In older but less well-known operas, the Met is also more adventurous. No recent work better exemplifies this than Elijah Moshinsky's production of Tchaikovsky's ''Queen of Spades'' (which can be seen again starting on March 18). This is opera on a grand scale, with stage-filling sets and large rosters of strikingly costumed choristers. Yet, with its bold color scheme, daring use of blacks and grays, and geometric designs, the production seems modern as well. Again, critics are not unanimous about its success, but some gave ecstatic praise, and few disputed the vision involved.
Yet there is a vital middle ground between the traditional and the avant-garde, represented by the 1996 production by Lesley Koenig of Mozart's ''Cosi Fan Tutte,'' with sets by Michael Yeargan. With its sunny colors and airy beauty, the production wonderfully evoked the opera's setting: in the first scene, on the shores of the Mediterranean in Naples, you could practically smell the salt water. Yet, the look of it was spare in a way that seemed modern and fresh.  ''Cosi'' is not a bread-and-butter opera, so the Met dares to recruit a younger, fresh talent like Ms. Koenig. But hiring her to produce a new ''Traviata'' would have been too risky, Mr. Volpe said. ''I don't know that she's ready for that,'' he said. ''It's a lot of pressure. Too big a gamble.''
Apparently Mr. Volpe has his own sense of the stakes involved. Wasn't turning over the new ''Traviata'' to the creatively spent producer and designer responsible for the old one also too big a gamble?
The new ''Lucia'' lacks even the redeeming quality of Zeffirellian opulence. Mr. Joel, as the New York magazine critic Peter G. Davis wrote, ''cannot even get a chorus on  or offstage gracefully, let alone liven the action with dramatic tension or character development.'' Most sadly, the lead singers, at least on opening night, seemed woefully lacking in direction, particularly Ms. Swenson, who, at her best, is a technically exquisite vocalist. Though several  sopranos have greater coloratura agility and more fearless brilliance, few sing with Ms. Swenson's sheer sonorous beauty and unforced fullness of tone.
Still, never the most compelling presence, she needs the guidance of a good director and a sensitive conductor. In awarding her with this touchstone role in a new production, the Met provided neither. As the company's artistic director, James Levine cannot do everything. In fact, he is  criticized by some for doing too much.
Still, he has been singularly uninterested in Ms. Swenson's specialty, the bel canto repertory. Perhaps Carlo Rizzi, who conducted the ''Lucia,'' was trying mightily to support a singer out of her depth in a daunting role, which was the view of some critics. But, for whatever reasons, the conductor and the soprano seemed at odds all night. The orchestra played sluggishly; the chorus, which can be so splendid, sounded terrible.
One hopes the company will stick by Ms. Swenson. Mr. Levine has accomplished what he has with the orchestra by making long-term growth his mantra. He has nurtured many Met singers with similar patience, like the baritone Dwayne Croft, who has grown into a major artist, and the soprano Renee Fleming, whose sublime portrayal of the countess in the new Jonathan Miller production of Mozart's ''Nozze di Figaro'' will enter operatic lore. (''I was there,'' wizened opera buffs will brag some day.)
For future productions, there are encouraging signs at the company.  Mr. Lamos has been tapped for the premiere of John Harbison's ''Great Gatsby.'' Mr. Flimm will produce  ''Fidelio.'' Mr. Albery will return, this time for ''The Merry Widow,'' which Mr. Volpe promises will not be ''all froufrou and pretty,'' but rethought and interesting.
He asked Martin Scorsese to take on ''Il Trovatore,'' and though intrigued, the director said his work in film must come first, which is too bad. You can just imagine Verdi's Gypsies steeped in bonding rituals like a fearsome family of Mafia goodfellas.
Mr. Volpe has even held discussions with Francesca Zambello, excoriated for her nightmarishly surreal 1992 production of ''Lucia,'' which the new one replaces. ''We all had a bad experience with that,'' Mr. Volpe said. ''But she is a talented artist and should work here. We must find the right piece, however.'' You can bet it will not be a bread-and-butter opera.
Still, would it not have been better for the Met to stick with the old Zeffirelli ''Traviata'' rather than replace it in panic with another, given its empty extravagance? Around the house on ''Lucia's'' opening night, wistful talk was heard about Ms. Zambello's production. At least it had a point of view.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
